---
title: Project Descriptions: Hands-on research into the preconditions of digital publishing.
author: kimberley
date: 2013-05-30
...

# Project Descriptions: Hands-on research into the preconditions of digital publishing. {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
May 30, 2013 at 1:28 pm.

*Each subgroup, consisting of a publisher, designer and developer has
formulated their own research project within the bigger framework of the
Digital Publishing Toolkit research program, and will be based on one or
more publications of the publisher. The overall focus is on pragmatic
solutions for digital publishers within the art and culture sector. The
experiences of these hands-on projects will eventually be collected in a
‘Digital Publishing Toolkit’, giving insight into the preconditions of
digital publishing, providing open-source tools where possible, and
allowing publishers of the arts and culture sector to navigate this
diverse and complex landscape of digital publishing in a more grounded
way.*

**** ****

The **subgroup Valiz** is working on the publication *Context Without
Walls*. This new series is a collaboration between Daphne Pappers and
Valiz. Within this series intercontinental contemporary art will be
discussed in relation to philosophical, anthropological, political and
art historical notions. The series will exist of eight separate parts,
and is created initially for printed publication. However, for this
project Valiz, Puntpixel and Meeus Ontwerpt will digitize the series.

The goal of this project is to publish the first two parts of the series
as an e-book, and to develop a digitization manual for the series
overall. The digital publication must go beyond the PDF versions of the
print documents. The publisher and designers want to add elements that
complement the current content. For instance hyperlinks (between books
of the series and within the books themselves), searchable corpora,
complementary content through for example images, sound and/or video
material. From a designer perspective it is important that the analog
design, created by Meeus Ontwerpt, will get a digital equivalent.
Central to this is translating the relation between the text and the
image section of the analog publication to a digital version in such a
way that the design is still recognizable, but also relates to the new
medium.

 

The **subgroup BIS publishers** is working on two publications. *Think
like a Lawyer, Don’t Act Like One* is a popular printed publication in
America. The e-book version will focus on keeping absolute control over
the design, with a fixed format, own font and the left and right pages
relation fixed. Especially this last part is tricky in relation to the
diversity of aspect ratios of the different devices you have to deal
with in relation to digital publishing. Therefore the publication will
be limited to an ePub/Kindle format. Research into the different formats
and devices you have to take into account when designing and/or
developing for digital publishing was part of this publication
trajectory.

More complex publications to digitize are the two product design books,
*Sketching*, and *Sketching The Basics*, written by Koos Eissen and
Roselien Steur, both connected to TU Delft Faculty of Industrial Design
Engineering and the Hogeschool of Amsterdam, product design. The books
have a large international reach and are used in design courses all over
the world. The goal of this project is to translate the books into an
interactive and media rich educational publication that is accessible on
multiple devices. Moreover, the team wants to get insight into what
interactive elements give added value to a digital educational book. For
instance, an in-app sketchbook, social elements, video, layered images
etc, and how this relates to the wishes and experiences of the user.

Through these two cases hands-on insight into the problematics of
digital publishing will be given – this is not only complex because of
the limited availability of technique (formats like ePub, Html 5, etc.),
but also because of the different ecosystems that surround these
publishing formats.

**** ****

The **subgroup of nai010 Publishers** is also working on two
publications. On the one hand a digital publication for the Stedelijk
Museum of Amsterdam that is based on the printed publication
*Highlights*, a collection of high-end artworks, will be developed. The
starting point for this digital publication is the idea that visits to
the Stedelijk, through the use of a digital publication, can be
prepared, deepened and afterwards ‘taken along’. The research will focus
on the idea of ‘highlights’ as a collection of ‘high-end artworks with
commentary’ – which can be deconstructed in an iTunes-like structure of
mini-publications on one high-end artwork – which can be combined into
sets of mini-publications: personal favorites, ‘curated’ collections
etc. From a developers point of view, the user-scenarios are an
important part of the research.

The other digital publication will be developed for the Glasmuseum in
Leerdam – an exhibition about E.H. Haeckel. His work is based on
systematically cataloging and classifying subterranean living species,
in beautiful drawings or glass sculptures. Therefore this project allows
to approach digital publishing from a database-like perspective: On the
one hand it looks into the opportunities digital publishing can give for
adding navigation layers and how this can correlate with different
reader groups, also design wise. And on the other hand how, from a
developer’s perspective, the digital material can be reused within the
same publication, limiting file-size.

****The **INC subgroup** will look into the concept of ‘*The Book as
Directory*’. Here the book is no longer distributed in one format, but
is presented in all its possible formats – from which the user can
choose the format wanted and/or the format that is suitable for the
device used. Central to this research is to get a better insight into
the workflow of developing digital publications that move beyond putting
the print PDF online, and how INC should change their print-oriented
workflow to be able to create digital publications for themselves. It
will examine digital publication formats and their implications in the
workflow and production process, and the changing ways in which *The
Book as Directory* will serve the interests of publisher, author,
distributor and reader. The *Unlike Us Reader* will be used as a
test-case. This research will be complemented with a research into the
systematic use of metadata and document management, and the role it
plays within digital publishing workflows.
