---
title: Institute of Network Cultures – One thousand and One workflows
author: marcstumpel
date: 2013-11-28
...

# Institute of Network Cultures – One thousand and One workflows {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [marcstumpel](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/marcstumpel/ "Posts by marcstumpel"),
November 28, 2013 at 4:30 pm.

The final presentation of the Digital Publishing Toolkit meeting, [the
ABC of digital
publishing](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/11/het-abc-van-digitaal-publiceren-bijeenkomst-28-november-programma/),
was held by [Miriam Rasch](http://www.miriamrasch.nl/), publication
manager at the Institute of Network Cultures. In her talk, she addressed
workflows, format conversion, finding the ideal format, metadata and how
to put these all together. According to Rasch, the great diversity of
input and output formats that are available today, calls for digital
publishers to have a flexible workflow, instead of a single defined path
to follow.



![Miriam Rasch, Photo: Martin
Risseeuw](imgs/11099241894_5b5833e64b_z.jpg)
Miriam Rasch, Photo: Martin Risseeuw



Taking the Silvio Lorusso’s idea of the ‘[Book as a
Directory](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/05/the-book-as-directory)‘
as starting point, the main goal of the INC subgroup (consisting of
Michael Murtaugh, Joost Kircz, Silvio Lorusso, Miriam Rasch and Kimmy
Spreeuwenberg) is to define the workflow for INC publications. In doing
so, the aim is to make it easier for everyone involved (editors,
designer and INC staff) to ‘natively’ output digital publications, as
well as to provide insights about digital publication workflows, which
can be useful for publishing houses.



Considering the fact that [Adobe
InDesign](http://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adobe_InDesign) is still central
to the workflow of many publishers, INC’s experiments with new
publication forms started with by applying an Indesign-Centric Workflow
to the development of the [Epub](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EPUB)
version of the [Unlike Us
Reader](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/07/unlike-us-reader-in-epub-format/)
print publication. (Read elaborate notes on the conversion
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/05/epub-development-in-adobe-indesign-cs6/)).
This process actually turned out to be quite sloppy with a lot of manual
labour, e.g. adding hyperlinks. Consequentially, INC realized that it
would be much more effective to have a modified HTML centric workflow,
with structured content in each phase and a file format that is
maintained throughout the entire process.



![Html Centric Workflow, INC Subgroup](imgs/htmlcentricworkflow.jpg)
Html Centric Workflow, INC Subgroup



This file format should then easily serve as the basis for a printed
publication as well as an epub. But, how is this possible with many
authors submitting their work in a Word file?

One solution, albeit not the holy grail, is to use
[MarkDown](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown), a rather simple
markup language, comparable to HTML. According to Rasch MarkDown is
perfect for text -based editors, like herself, and at the same time very
suitable for making digital products. It has a great level of
readability, while maintaining a strict content structure. Then again,
most authors will keep working with Word instead of Markdown editors
like [Mou](http://mouapp.com/). Therefore Rasch stressed the need for
ways to convert Word documents to the Markdown format. INC´s research
into file formats and conversions is documented on the [Digtial
Publishing Toolkit blog](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing).

The INC subgroup has also started to develop a specific INC set of
metadata, which can be useful to manage contents and output custom
versions of the publications. They started by referring to a broad
Document Type Definition (DTD), similar to that of
[Elsevier](http://www.elsevier.com/author-schemas/elsevier-xml-dtds-and-transport-schemas),
but eventually derived the metadata directly from all the available
content. Compiling a condensed list of about 10-20 metadata that
specifically refer to INC readers, was helpful in understanding the
essential and wanted metadata for INC´s digital publications, and to
figure out what´s ´special´ about the list of INC publications (for
example, the various inputs, like video, blogs, interviews, texts etc).
The set of metadata is applicable to other publications, but could also
prove useful for publishers in general.



![INC, condensed metadata set](imgs/incmetadataset.jpg)
INC, condensed metadata set



In addition to this list, INC has considered the idea of embedding
metadata directly into MarkDown documents. In this line of thought,
Michael and Silvio created a mockup of a customized Markdown editor. But
should filing and tagging articles accordingly with the metadata be ´the
end´? Are there other unexplored possibilities?

Rasch explained how the subgroup´s research is shifting away from the
middle of the workflow to it´s very beginning. It´s the collaborative,
back and forth process, between author, editor, designer and proof
reader, that marks the publishing workflow. Word could be considered as
´the battlefield´, where many revisions leads to more comments,
annotations and corrections. To map the complexities in the workflows,
INC has started to take more role-oriented perspective, leading to new
questions, such as: how to handle editing in Markdown? Should everyone
involved in the workflow start using Markdown editors? These are the
kinds of questions the subgroup will increasingly focus on.

Some team members recently participated in the [Free Libraries For Every
Soul](http://impakt.nl/nl/festival/2013-festival/program-2013-festival/capitalism-catch-22-programme/special-projects/free-libraries-for-every-soul/)
hackathon at IMPAKT where some ideas were developed around epub and the
creating new kinds of publications. One outcome was an epub generated
out of INC´s [Flickr
feed](http://www.flickr.com/photos/networkcultures/). In the future this
kind of event-related content could be merged into customized versions
of publications, such as an author page, where one could find all of the
available related material (biography, writings for the reader,
presentation video´s from Vimeo, Flickr Photo´s, related blogposts).

Another concept -at the end of the workflow- was to take the idea the
epub format as input to an extreme, and apply it to relatively new
genre, the ´book trailer´. This resulted in the creation of the [epub
Book Trailer
Generator](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/11/free-library-for-every-soul-hackaton-first-report/),
which manipulates a publication´s metadata with scripts, to generate a
´subliminal´ book GIF trailer.



![Unlike Us Reader Epub Trailer](imgs/trailer-Unlike-Us-Reader.gif)
Unlike Us Reader Epub Trailer



*Do you have feedback, comments or questions regarding the Digital
Publishing Toolkit research project?* [Let us
know](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/contact/)!\*

The original presentation file (PDF) can be found
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/11/07.INC_presentation_toolkit.pdf)**Watch
the full presentation below**

[![](imgs/456897599_640.jpg)](http://vimeo.com/80884524)

[Showcase Institute of Network Cultures – One thousand and One
workflows](http://vimeo.com/80884524) from [network
cultures](http://vimeo.com/networkcultures) on
[Vimeo](https://vimeo.com).
