---
title: Digital publications in practice
author: kimberley
date: 2013-06-23
...

# Digital publications in practice {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
June 23, 2013 at 2:08 pm.

![caption](imgs/02_Top5SmartphoneOS.png)

![caption](imgs/01_Top5Vendors.png)

## Jargon, Platforms & Publication Formats

*By Marc de Bruijn and Jorrit Sybesma (PUNTPIXEL)*

First of all this document exists to assist the different parties
directly involved in the RAAK-MKB project “Digital Publishing Toolkit”.
The platforms for which publications may be developed will be introduced
and contextualised in brief, and a preliminary advice for choosing
publication formats is issued.

**CONTENT**[JARGON](#5d6s91ntioq7)[PLATFORMS](#Platforms)

[Personal Computer
(PC)](#7r2fouir5lvf)[Tablet](#l6tacdlw75co)[Smartphones](#tpb8qz7jcs94)[eReaders](#3q2ispek9io8)

[FORMATS](#cjpclzljebw)

[EPUB](#3ip4u83tw8vp) – [Advantages](#367iiwuwf48a) /
[Disadvantages](#93li3idq4bpx)[HPub](#yod1xa3m18aj) –
[Advantages](#Advantages) / [Disadvantages](#dfandkn6fm2c)[Which
format?](#cktdv2veofhr)



# 

# JARGON

Using a fixed set of terms is important in this phase of the project.
Terms like *platform, framework,* etc.

**Platform:** The device on which the digital publication are viewed,
read, and used. This includes eReaders, tablets, smartphones and
personal computers. See: Platforms

**Format:**Formats

**Documentation:** Within the context of the RAAK-MKB project “Digital
Publishing Toolkit” documentation of the development of the digital
publication is an essential factor besides building a framework;
together these two form the proposed toolkit.

**Framework:**

**Toolkit:** According to us, the proposed toolkit within the project
“Digital publishing Toolkit” consists of two components: documentation
and a framework. Both elements will be publicly accessible and available
to third parties.



# PLATFORMS

One of the biggest challenges is the amount of extant platforms, each
with their own limitations. The platforms discussed below are in order
of openness, starting with the ones allowing most freedom, descending to
the more closed options.

## Personal Computer (PC)

The PC (desktop as well as notebooks) allows for the most freedom. One
has access to a web browser and the possibility to install a great range
of applications. For viewing EPUB (.epub) document formats there are
various, mostly free applications. For Macintosh users there is for
example [Calibre](http://calibre-ebook.com) (open source, accessible for
several operating systems), [Adobe Digital
Editions](http://www.adobe.com/nl/products/digital-editions.html)
(Macintosh and Windows)
[Kitabu](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/kitabu/id492498910?mt=12)
(free), [BookReader](http://macbookreader.com) (paid) and
[Nook](http://www.barnesandnoble.com/u/nook-for-mac/379003592) (free).
All these applications are able to open EPUBs, some of them support
multiple document formats and
[DRM](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_rights_management). Adobe
Digital Editions for instance supports interactive PDFs besides EPUB.
Calibre has [an impressive
list](http://manual.calibre-ebook.com/faq.html#what-formats-does-app-support-conversion-to-from)
of supported document formats ((According to the documentation: CBZ,
CBR, CBC, CHM, DJVU, EPUB, FB2, HTML, HTMLZ, LIT, LRF, MOBI, ODT, PDF,
PRC, PDB, PML, RB, RTF, SNB, TCR, TXT, TXTZ)) and can also convert
documents into a limited set ((AZW3, EPUB, FB2, OEB, LIT, LRF, MOBI,
HTMLZ, PDB, PML, RB, PDF, RTF, SNB, TCR, TXT, TXTZ)) of digital
publication formats.

There are also browser extensions for Mozilla Firefox (for example
[EPUBReader](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/epubreader/))
and Google Chrome (for example
[MagicScroll](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/magicscroll-ebook-reader/ghgnmgfdoiplfmhgghbmlphanpfmjble),
[Readium](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/readium/fepbnnnkkadjhjahcafoaglimekefifl))
to view EPUBs.

Another possibility is to leave the separate applications and browser
extensions for what they are and choose a web based EPUB viewer. The
advantage of this kind of web platform is that the material can be
accessed by every (modern) web browser. Examples of these kinds of
platforms are [MagicScroll](http://www.magicscroll.net) ((MagicScroll
offers a browser extension and a web platform.)),
[Aldiko](http://www.aldiko.com) and [Booki.sh](https://booki.sh)
((Booki.sh uses [Monocle](http://monocle.inventivelabs.com.au), an
open-source EPUB viewer developed in Ruby on Rails)). A disadvantage of
these web platforms is that they can terminate their services at any
given moment, examples of this are
[bookworm](http://oreilly.com/bookworm) of O’Reilly Media and [Ibis
Reader](http://ibisreader.com) (bought by [Safari Books
Online](http://www.safaribooksonline.com)).



## Tablet

The tablet-market is dominated by a few big players. As is the case with
the telephone market, there are roughly two main players with their
matching operating systems: Apple with
[iOS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IOS) and Samsung with
[Android](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Android_(operating_system)). The
Android-segment consists of many manufacturers offering similar hardware
with a variant of Android as its operating system. However, Samsung has
the biggest market-share.
(([www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS23772412\#](https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS23772412#.UUw2Pb8WH8s)
)) There exist smaller variants of tablets by manufacturers like Amazon
(Kindle Fire HD) and Barnes & Noble (Nook HD+), these are discussed
under the header [eReaders](#id.ok66hvpvpzwy).

For tablets the situation is comparable to that of the PC, with the
exception of browser extensions.

The web-based EPUB viewers are also available for use with the internet
browser of the tablet. Most browsers use [WebKit](http://www.webkit.org)
(open source) as rendering engine; this means that WebKit is responsible
for generating the visual and functional parts of a page on the web.
Both the tablet and the PC versions of Apple Safari and Google Chrome
use WebKit and [Opera](http://www.opera.com) will also implement WebKit
in favour of their own rendering engine in the near future. The only
other relevant player regarding browsers is Microsoft’s Internet
Explorer. However, Microsoft doesn’t (yet) play an important role on the
tablet-market (in spite of the introduction of Microsoft Surface) and is
mostly dominant within the Windows PC-segment. Internet Explorer uses
the closed-sourced [Trident rendering
engine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trident_(layout_engine))

There are also applications available which can interpret EPUB. For iOS
there are among others
[iBooks](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/ibooks/id364709193?mt=8&ls=1&v0=www-its-ipad-builtinapps-ibooks-us)
((The only application that can read the closed iBooks document
format.)) ,
[Kindle](http://www.amazon.com/gp/feature.html/ref=kcp_ipa_ln_ar?docId=1000490441)
((Amazon uses the same name for both it’s hardware (the Kindle eReaders)
and software in  relation to digital publications)), [Sony
Reader](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/reader-ebooks-from-sony/id566383171),
[Kobo](https://itunes.apple.com/US/app/id301259483?mt=8&ign-mpt=uo%3D4)
and
[NOOK](http://www.barnesandnoble.com/u/nook-for-ipad-iphone-ipod-touch/379003589/).
There are also a few applications which are not directly linked to a
publisher (for instance
[Readmill](https://itunes.apple.com/nl/app/readmill-ebook-reader/id438032664?l=en&mt=8),
[Bluefire
Reader](https://itunes.apple.com/nl/app/bluefire-reader/id394275498?l=en&mt=8)).
Android also has a
[Kindle](http://www.amazon.com/gp/feature.html?ie=UTF8&docId=165849822)
application and
[NOOK](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=bn.ereader&feature=search_result),
[Sony Reader](https://ebookstore.sony.com/rme/) and
[Kobo](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.kobobooks.android&feature=search_result)
are present. Just like on iOS there are also applications of smaller
players, like
[Aldiko](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.aldiko.android&feature=related_apps#?t=W251bGwsMSwxLDEwOSwiY29tLmFsZGlrby5hbmRyb2lkIl0.),
[Moon+
Reader](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.flyersoft.moonreader&feature=search_result),
[FBReader](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.flyersoft.moonreader&feature=search_result)
and [Cool
Reader](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.coolreader&feature=related_apps#?t=W251bGwsMSwxLDEwOSwib3JnLmNvb2xyZWFkZXIiXQ..).

## 



## Smartphones

The situation of smartphones is largely identical to that of tablets.
However, the market is focussed (heavily) on Android ((
[www.businesswire.com/news/home/20130214005415/en/Android-iOS-Combinid](http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20130214005415/en/Android-iOS-Combinid)
)), a trend that is expected within the tablet realm as well. As of
2013, both Android and iOS hold the largest market share
((<http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS24002213#.UUxKAL8WH8t>)).

Most of the applications for tablets are available for smartphones. The
interface is scaled to the smaller size of the telephone – the same is
true for the web-based platforms.



## eReaders

eReaders became widely known by the introduction of [Amazon
Kindle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_Kindle) in 2007. eReaders
differ from tablets in the way that they are only suitable for reading
books, are relatively cheap and have monochrome displays. An important
characteristic of the eReader is the use of “electronic paper”
(e-paper), a so-called electrophoretic screen. “Electronic paper” is
designed to mimic the characteristics of paper as close as possible and
is relatively low on energy consumption.

Both Amazon and Barnes & Noble also offer more expensive models, Kindle
Fire (en Kindle Fire HD) and NOOK Tablet (and NOOK HD+) respectively.
These models are not really eReaders anymore, but fully-fledged, small
sized tablets. These models do not use “e-paper”, but colour [LED
screens with
backlight](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LED-backlit_LCD_display) – a
standard component of tablets like iPad or Galaxy Tab. Mostly these
tablets use a version of the Android operating system as its core, in
contrast to the classic monochromatic eReaders using their own operating
system built on a version of Linux. The Samsung [Galaxy
Note](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samsung_Galaxy_Note_10.1) and Apple
[iPad mini](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPad_Mini) can be seen as an
answer to these smaller sized tablets.

Thus, one cannot speak of a dated generation regarding the black and
white eReaders. The current definition of eReader is a device on which
digital books can be read, and presented on monochromatic “electronic
paper”. The transition to a kind of “e-paper” also capable of rendering
colour has not yet started and it remains questionable if this will
happen soon. At the moment, a very limited set of devices is available
that render colour, like the [JetBook
Color](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ECTACO_jetBook#JetBook_Color) (\$
500,-)
(([www.ectaco.com/jetBook\_Color/](http://www.ectaco.com/jetBook_Color/)
)) and the Hanvon  [WISEreader
C920](http://www.hanvon.com/en/products/ebook/products-c920.html) (± \$
530,-)
(([www.engadget.com/2011/01/09/hanvon-brings-e920-worlds-first-color-e-ink-reader-to-ces-we/](http://www.engadget.com/2011/01/09/hanvon-brings-e920-worlds-first-color-e-ink-reader-to-ces-we/)
)). Both models make use of the
[Triton](http://www.eink.com/display_products_triton.html)[Imaging
Film](http://www.eink.com/display_products_triton.html) of the company E
ink, a technology also present in the monochromatic models of the
Kindle, for example. The reason why big players like Amazon and Barnes &
Noble choose to make LED-backlit screen tablets in favour of “electronic
paper” for their colour versions, is probably due to the high production
costs. Currently there are “conventional” tablets on the market with
more options (apart from reading eBooks), for the same price as a colour
eReader.



# FORMATS

A wide range of document formats to distribute digital publications
exists. Though the question is if these formats are suitable in relation
to the requirements of the publishers involved in the “Digital
Publishing Toolkit” project. For instance, iBooks from Apple, a
closed-source end-format that can be created by using [iBooks
Author](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBooks_Author), is comparable to
EPUB to a certain extend. However, iBooks contains undocumented
technical extensions that can only be interpreted by the iBooks
application for iOS.

Interactive PDF is another end-format that offers interesting
possibilities at first sight. It is possible to implement video and
audio in the PDFs, as well as more common features like annotations and
hyperlinks of pages within a publication. It is also possible to use JavaScript in PDFs,
and this offers – in theory – interesting possibilities for using for
example animations or requesting information from external sources. The
aforementioned possibilities, with exception of annotations and
hyperlinking, only work consistently within Adobe Reader and only in a
limited way, or not at all, in alternatives like [Foxit
Reader](http://www.foxitsoftware.com/Secure_PDF_Reader/)or
[Preview](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preview_(Mac_OS)) for Mac.

It’s best to analyse in further detail the publication formats that are
suitable. Below we discuss two document formats that most likely offer
the best solutions.



## EPUB

The EPUB standard was introduced in 2007 and is now at version 3.0. The
latest update to the standard was in 2011. EPUB itself is based on the
Open eBook Publication Structure (OEBPS) dating from 1999. Management of
the standard is in the hands of the International Digital Publishing
Forum (IDPF). EPUB is nothing more than a compressed package
([ZIP](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ZIP_(file_format))) of documents
(text, audio, video, fonts, scripts, etc.) that can be read on an
eReader.

The [EPUB 3 standard](http://idpf.org/epub/30/spec/epub30-overview.html)
offers the following, main possibilities:

1.  Structural lay-out on basis of HTML5;
2.  Hyperlinking, within the confines of the EPUB;
3.  Support for [MathML](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MathML), a
    language for producing the notation of mathematical formulas;
4.  Scripting the content using JavaScript;
5.  Applying a custom visual style to the publication with the use of
    CSS;
6.  Use of custom fonts (other than the ones present on the viewing
    device);
7.  Embedding audio and video;
8.  Support of
    [SVG](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalable_Vector_Graphics), the
    possibility to apply scalable vector graphics in a digital
    publication;

To a certain extent, producing an EPUB is comparable to developing a
website, the most important difference is that an EPUB is restricted set
of possibilities. Some of those restrictions are imposed by the standard
itself but many of the limitations stem from the lack of support by
various EPUB readers.



### Advantages

-   Wide support of the document format;
-   Document format is based on a standard with a long lifespan;
-   Thorough technical documentation.



### Disadvantages

-   Limited support of the standard by many eReaders, either on the
    basis of technical limitations (monochromatic screen, safety
    considerations), or because another document format is preferred
    (iBooks in the case of Apple);
-   Due to the previously mentioned disadvantage there is limited
    freedom in relation to experimenting with technique and design. A
    magazine-like publication with lots of photographic material in
    EPUB-format seems highly unlikely or at least very difficult to
    produce, at the moment.



## HPub

HPub is not a standard with a central controlling authority, as is the
case with IDPF and EPUB. An HPub is, just like EPUB, a compressed
ZIP-package that contains documents (texts, audio, video, fonts,
scripts, etc.). HPub originates from the open source [Baker
Framework](http://bakerframework.com) for iOS and the derivative [Friar
Framework](http://www.friarframework.com) for Android.

The difference between EPUB and HPub lies not in the document format,
but in the viewer interprets the package and displays the content to the
user. The Baker and Friar Framework offer the code for a basic
application that can be adjusted according to ones own design, and
eventually distributed in the App Store for iOS and Google Play for
Android. The application offers support for downloading multiple
editions in a series and purchasing separate editions through the
payment systems of Apple and Google. The viewer for HPub uses WebKit to
present its content.

Why would one choose HPub? The format offers complete freedom in
defining the structure of your publication, because you are not limited
by an official standard. HPub could be a possible file format when
publishing a magazine (see [Aside](http://asidemag.com), which uses its
[own framework](http://grid.asidemag.com) for the lay-out structure) or
a strongly visually oriented publication.



### Advantages

-   Complete freedom in defining the publication structure;
-   All technical possibilities of the web are available;
-   Familiar development environment for web developers, as it’s in
    essence a small website compiled into a ZIP-package.
-   Publication is also accessible by web browser.



### Disadvantages

-   Not an official standard;
-   Maintenance and costs of the viewer application;
-   Little documentation;
-   Only available for two platforms;
-   No support by eReaders.

## MOBI/AZW/AZW3 (KF8)

AZW, a third, closed format is more like a collection of formats,
distributed by Amazon for its Kindle eReaders. Initially digital
publications based on Mobipocket/Mobi were offered. This standard is
derived from the Open eBook format, just like EPUB, and has been on the
market from 2000 and onwards. The company responsible for the format
(the French Mobipocket SA) was bought by Amazon in 2005, which
subsequently introduced the Mobi-format with certain adjustments and
limitations (AZW ((<http://wiki.mobileread.com/wiki/AZW> )) ) for the
first generation Kindle. Amazon introduced yet another standard for its
eReaders with the introduction of Kindle Fire in 2011. This [model
KF8](http://www.amazon.com/gp/feature.html?docId=1000729511), or AZW3
((<http://wiki.mobileread.com/wiki/KF8>)), has EPUB 3.0 as its basis,
still uses the document extension .azw and also incorporates HTML5 and
CSS3, both important parts of EPUB3.0. It is still possible to read the
older documents with the Mobi-structure with Kindle Fire.

To use EPUBs on a Kindle device they should be converted by the program
[KindleGen](http://www.amazon.com/gp/feature.html?ie=UTF8&docId=1000765211)
(for Mac OS X, Linux and Windows), produced by Amazon. What is left of
the specific technical qualities of the EPUB after conversion to
AZW/AZW3 is difficult to assess.



## What format?

The most important question right now is which publication format fits
the wishes of the publisher best. Together with publisher Valiz we’ve
decided to produce a dummy publication of about ten pages in which the
different technical possibilities of the different formats are
presented.

Initially our intention is to develop this dummy publication according
to the guidelines of EPUB 3.0, using the full potential of the standard,
disregarding the (technical) limitations of the applications on
different platforms. However, the third format AZW should be taken into
account, considering the (growing) market share of Amazon. Is it for
instance possible to convert EPUB to KF8 in a reliable way, and is
Mobipocket still a relevant format?

The EPUB dummy is intended to be the starting point for further
development or a turning point where we might need to consider
alternative formats like HPub.
