---
title: Opinions and Stats About Digital Publishing as Q&A
author: Silvio Lorusso
date: 2013-04-05
...

# Opinions and Stats About Digital Publishing as Q&A {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/),
April 5, 2013 at 2:49 pm.

**Are tablets and e-readers are two competing markets?**[Yes. The
booming market for tablet computers is starting to make the dedicated
e-reader
obsolete.](http://edition.cnn.com/2013/02/28/tech/gaming-gadgets/tablets-replacing-e-readers)
*February 28, 2013*

**How many ebooks does Amazon sell in comparison to printed
ones?**[Amazon now sells more ebooks than hardbacks and paperbacks
combined, the company has
said.](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-19148146) *August 6, 2012*

**What are the most popular ereaders on the US market?**[Amazon’s Kindle
is by far the most popular device, owned by 62% of e-book readers;
Barnes and Noble’s Nook has 22% of the
market.](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/04/05/ereaders-ebooks-survey-how-many-people-read_n_1405449.html)
*June 4, 2012*

**Do ebooks substitute printed ones?**[Not at all. Ebook readers are
still voracious consumers of print books
too.](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/04/05/ereaders-ebooks-survey-how-many-people-read_n_1405449.html)
*June 4, 2012*

**Does the iPad’s retina display measure up to e-ink?**[No. If you love
reading and are looking to invest a chunk of money into a device as a
dedicated e-reader, then the iPad is not your best
bet.](http://arstechnica.com/apple/2012/04/why-the-new-ipads-retina-display-loses-the-battle-in-the-e-reader-wars/)
*April 11, 2012*

**How many US citizens own an e-reader?**[29% of Americans age 18 and
older own at least one specialized device for e-book reading – either a
tablet or an e-book
reader.](http://libraries.pewinternet.org/2012/04/04/the-rise-of-e-reading/)
*April 4, 2012*

**How many American adults have read ebooks?** [A fifth of American
adults have read an e-book in the past
year.](http://libraries.pewinternet.org/2012/04/04/the-rise-of-e-reading/)
*April 4, 2012*

**From the perspective of the book’s typology, did the market of ebooks
used to follow the same pattern of physical books in 2011?**[No. While
the majority of physical book sales are in adult non-fiction, the
majority of ebook sales are in adult
fiction.](http://www.sourcebooks.com/blog/ebooks-how-far-how-fast.html)
*2011*

**What were the most common ways to read an ebook in 2010?**[Laptops
only slightly trump the Kindle, 35 percent to 32 percent. Coming in
third was the iPhone, with 15 percent, followed by a Sony e-reader (12
percent), netbooks (10 percent) and the Barnes & Noble Nook (9 percent).
Also at 9 percent was the
iPad.](http://www.wired.com/business/2010/11/and-the-most-popular-way-to-read-an-e-book-is/)
*August 10, 2010*
