---
title: The Book as Directory
author: Silvio Lorusso
date: 2013-05-29
...

# The Book as Directory {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
May 29, 2013 at 10:39 am.

*[Originally posted on
[Doppiozero](http://www.doppiozero.com/materiali/web-analysis/quando-il-lettore-diventa-utente)
with the title “Quando il lettore diventa utente”]*



![](imgs/Inside_the_Kindle_3.jpg)
The Inside of a Kindle 3. Source:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Inside\_the\_Kindle\_3.jpg



The debate
around the \*future\* of publishing never lost momentum. For decades
writers, publishers, programmers and designers have been discussing the
revolutionary possibilities of the electronic book in terms of rich
media, non-linearity and augmentation. The iPad just gave a new boost to
the topic. In the meantime, the dream of an immersive reading experience
in a digital environment came true thanks to the Kindle and e-readers in
general. While much of the attention is directed toward those
content-oriented opportunities concerning modes of fruition and media
enrichment, the context of digital publishing is going under profound
modifications that affect the very definition of reading and the way the
reader relates tothe book as both cultural object and commodity.

In the context of digital publishing the \*future\* is here today (a
good reason to stop talking about \*future\*), but it’s not evident. It
doesn’t blatantly resemble science fiction. On the contrary, it
manifests itself through slight shifts in habit and perception of things
rather than in sensational technologic disruptions. Those shifts easily
become invisible as part of the daily routine. Jaron Lanier would say
they become
[lock-in](http://www.jaronlanier.com/gadgetwebresources.html). That’s
why it’s a good idea to focus more on the context than the content
before some of those concepts become ineradicable part of our common
perspective on books.

E-books are “real” not only from the technical point of view: [In 2012
A](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-19148146)[mazon declared
that](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-19148146)[it](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-19148146)[currently
sells more ebooks than hardbacks and paperbacks
combined.](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-19148146) However the
phenomenon shouldn’t be read only as a technological achievement that
made its way to the market. E-books and e-readers are only the tip of
the iceberg: they are accompanied and supported by a new overall
arrangement of the publishing model and infrastructure.

In fact every big player (Amazon, Google, Apple) on the market is
promoting its own publishing ecosystem. In doing so distributing
platforms are gaining power, overcoming both the publishing houses and
the authors. [When the book becomes a
service](http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/2007/11/17/the-future-of-reading.html),
the influence of the ecosystem doesn’t stop after the purchase, but
propagate to the act of reading through the reading device. Books also
become computers: machines that are not simply able to render ebook
files but actual [mobile
technologies](http://wiki.diffandrep.org/kindle-labor-of-reading),
constantly connected to the cloud. While using the Kindle, all the
highlights (along with all complete list of reading activities) are
remotely stored trough a \*silent\* process called
[W](http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html/ref=hp_left_sib?ie=UTF8&nodeId=200375890)[h](http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html/ref=hp_left_sib?ie=UTF8&nodeId=200375890)[i](http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html/ref=hp_left_sib?ie=UTF8&nodeId=200375890)[spersync](http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html/ref=hp_left_sib?ie=UTF8&nodeId=200375890).
Of course the absence of any evidence of those processes is meant not to
break the immersion into the reading activity. But when an huge amount
of data is collected ceaselessly, reading can no longer be considered a
private and autonomous act. Therefore it seems appropriate to speak of
*user* rather than *reader*, as the person who uses an e-reader
interacts with a complex system and performs, consciously or not, a
complex and networked series of operations.

The contextual changes in publishing also determine the meaning of
ownership regarding books: if you think of the book as a service it
makes sense to buy it twice when you want both the digital and the
physical version. A Kindle user can’t read the books he purchased on
other e-readers (as [Cory Doctorow puts
it](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nZFg-uq5zBA&feature=youtube_gdata_player),
it’s like buying a lightbulb from Walmart and be required to use it on a
Walmart lamp). Those books are encrypted: they are bound to a personal
profile and they can’t be duplicated. Ultimately Amazon has the power to
[remotely
delete](http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/18/technology/companies/18amazon.html?_r=0)
a book from the device.

Big distributors are influencing the reader’s behavior and mindset: as
an example, the Kindle app for desktop computers doesn’t allow
copy-paste. The lack of this feature, clearly against the intrinsic
tendency of the medium, is supposedly a market-driven choice: the
e-books that sell the most are fiction, and it is generally thought that
readers don’t need to copy-paste much from a fiction book. In return
they’re allowed to share passages on Facebook and Twitter. The service
offered by the big players, inevitably conditioned by a commercial
logic, not only determines a purchase process, but a usage pattern. And
the application of a usage pattern to the book corresponds to the
instillation of a cultural model.

Currently the ones that are taking the biggest advantage of new
technologies are neither the readers nor the authors, but the
distributors. So, what can the books’ producers do in order to oppose to
the

As [Project Gutenberg](http://www.gutenberg.org/) taught us, providing
the reader with a set of different tools for different uses of the same
content is already a revolutionary act. Different tools means different
formats and of course the main one would be ePub: an open, easy-to-tweak
format, the contents of which are not crystallized into a fixed layout
for a particular device. Either from ePub itself or from the various
development phases, it is possible to obtain a number of different
formats meant for different aims: plain text for general use, HTML for
online reading and, of course, PDF for print.

Rather than the book as a service, I like to think to the book as
directory: simply a .zip file containing all these different formats,
possibly provided by the publishing houses or the authors themselves
through their own websites. The book, not bound anymore to a software, a
device, a platform or a company, will then be easily read, annotated,
copy-pasted, shared and reworked. The book will return to be a
user-oriented technology.

– Silvio Lorusso ([@silvi0l0russo](https://twitter.com/silvi0L0russo))
