---
title: Kick-off Digital Publishing Toolkit
author: kimberley
date: 2013-03-24
...

# Kick-off Digital Publishing Toolkit {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
March 24, 2013 at 7:59 am.

*Report: Kick-off Toolkit Digital Publishing 7th of March 2013*

The kick-off meeting on the 7th of March was the official start of the
“Toolkit Digital Publishing” research project. Margreet Riphagen,
projectmanager of the Institute of Network Cultures, gave a short
introduction of the research project and introduced the partners of the
consortium that are involved in the research project. Geert Lovink
(lector Instituut voor Netwerkcultuur) and Florian Cramer (lector
creating010, lectoraat of the Willem de Kooning Academy) introduced
several topics that are important to keep in mind in relation to digital
publishing, and the partners gave short presentations about their know
how and expectations of digital publishing. At the end of the morning we
formed subgroups. Each subgroup, consisting of a publisher, designer and
developer will each formulate their own research projects within the
bigger framework of the Toolkit Digital Publishing research program and
will be based on one or more publications of the publisher.

As Margreet explained the research project is funded by RAAK-MKB
(Regionale Actie en Aandacht voor Kennisinnovatie), which is managed by

[SIA](http://www.innovatie-alliantie.nl/english.html) (Stichting
Innovatie Alliantie).
[Raak–MKB](http://www.innovatie-alliantie.nl/stimuleringsregeling/regeling/item/54-raak-mkb.html)
aims to improve knowledge exchange to strengthen the innovative ability
of MKB’s and Universities of Applied sciences.

The overall goal of the project is: “To realise a platform with tools
and methods that are based on open source- standards and tools, with
which publishers in art- and the cultural sector can publish
e-publications that are suitable for several (mobile) devices”

A consortium of partners will collaborate to reach this goal. It
consists of a group of publishers –
[BISPublishers](http://www.bispublishers.nl), [nai010
publishers](http://www.naipublishers.nl/nai010publishers/nai010_nl.html),
[FrameWeb](http://www.frameweb.com/magazines), [Institute of Network
Cultures](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/portal/), and
[Valiz](http://www.valiz.nl) – a group of developers and programmers –
[Arjen de Jong](http://www.arjendejong.nl) (Essence),
[Medamo](http://www.medamo.nl), [Brinka](http://www.brinka.nl),
[PUNTPIXEL](http://www.puntpixel.nl), [Restruct
Web](http://restruct.nl), and [Silvio
Lorusso](http://www.silviolorusso.com) – an expertise group that
consists of [Museum of the Image](http://www.motimuseum.nl), and
[Constant – Open Source Publishers](http://osp.constantvzw.org), and
other partners involved are: [Creating010](http://creating010.hr.nl) and
[Kircz Research Amsterdam](http://www.kra.nl/Website/benik.htm).

 

**Geert Lovink: about the proliferation and standards in the field of
e-publishing**

Geert emphasized that the project will be focused on experimenting, and
exploring what the possibilities are for design and the distributing
platforms. This particular research project thus doesn’t look into
business models of these digital modes of publishing. As he explains
there are other lectoraten that research this particular question. The
Institute of Network Cultures also looked into these kind of questions
in other projects such as: The New Media of Exchange: Dialogues on
Internet, Monetization and Finance.

He elaborates on the experience INC had with publishing their own
publications on digital platforms such as

[Issuu](http://issuu.com) and [Scribd](http://www.scribd.com), which are
free web readers, and [LuLu](http://www.lulu.com), a paid Print on
Demand service. As becomes clear these are just a small portion off the
platforms for publishing online. Geert also refers to the ePub platform
and the necessity to make all the INC publications available for this
platform. Another important development will be the availability of
Amazon.nl in the Netherlands, that will be probably launched around the
summer of 2013. Geert emphasizes that this development will be a ‘game
changer’ for publishing in the Netherlands if we look at experiences in
other countries. Another platform he refers to is the open source/ free
software platform Ubuntu which is an important international player. The
platform is developed for both Smartphones and Tablets. Another platform
that we should keep an eye out for is the collaboration between Nokia
and Windows. It is still unclear what will happen here, but this will
probably become more clear at the end of the year.

**Florian Cramer: about design and typography in the field of
e-publishing**

Florian starts his introduction with ‘expectation management’. He
explains that the field of design and typography with regards to digital
publishing is like the Internet was in the 1990s. The possibilities seem
endless, but once confronted with the limitations of the platform(s) you
end up with a very poor design. There are several aspects a designer
should keep in mind when designing for e-publishing. For instance the
multitude of devices that each have their own settings and requirements.
In this sense you can see it as the revival of the browser wars of the
90s, where each browser needed its own design. A result of this
splintering of devices is the necessity of reflowable content. The
content needs to be readable on all the different devices, and thus has
to change according to the proportions of the screen. The design is
adjusted dynamically. As Florian explains the paradigm of the page is
disappearing. Another aspect that makes it difficult for designers is
that the reader software itself isn’t fully developed. Most of them for
instance do not support non-European alphabets. Especially for the art-
design publications this will lead to even more limitations.

Florian also discussed several examples of platforms for e-publishing
that are already developed: [The people’s
E-book](http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1371597318/the-peoples-e-book)
– a webapplication for designers and artists to experiment with creating
their own publications. [Kyur8](http://kyur8.com) – this platform is
developed by graphic designers in New York and it allows people to
create their own photobooks on the basis off several templates. It is
based on HTML5. You can see this as a platform for Zines.

According to Florian it is important to collect these best practices and
see what is already done in the field of e-publishing and look for
solutions for the problems we encounter. It is about empowering the
publishers, designers and developers to ensure that they can find their
way in the field of e-publishing on their own.

\*\*\*\* \*\*\*\*

**Expectations and inventory of existing knowledge and best practices
off the partners**

The presentations off the publishers illustrated that there are a lot of
ideas about e-publishing, but not enough know-how and as a result the
steps, or successes, that are made in this direction are very small. As
Rudolf explained “veel vallen en weinig opstaan”. There is a lot of
uncertainty about how to approach e-publishing, and knowledge about the
possibilities that are already out there is missing, especially in
relation to distribution.

From the perspective of the developers and designers the remarks made by
Florian are confirmed. Annemieke from Restruct Web explains how their
first experience with e-publishing was very challenging as they had
relatively high expectations of the possibilities. They developed an App
for Cross-lab at the WdKA Rotterdam. They encountered problems with
integrating video into the app. Since it had to be readable without an
internet connection the video needed to be integrated in the file
itself, and eventually they ended up with a large application file that
only works on a Apple tablet version. As she emphasized with regard to
e-publishing it is important to develop something that is sustainable:
It needs to work on several platforms and endure the test of time and
platform updates.

The designers also addressed the social and interactive possibilities of
e-publishing – how is it possible to share reading experiences, notes
etc. And to what extend is it possible to integrate video, images or
even Google maps into the e-publication? These questions relate to what
Florian called ‘the Expanded Book”. But, as Florian emphasizes it is
more important to approach e-publshing as a whole new medium. We should
not just try to think about how to translate a book to a digital medium,
but think about the possibilities of publishing beyond adding video and
other interactivity. What new modes of publishing does it ask for?

In response to the question, if it is possible to export e-Pub from
inDesign, Florian refers to the Guru of e-Pub design, Elizabeth Castro,
who wrote the book

[e-Pub straight to the point](http://www.elizabethcastro.com/epub/). It
explains how you can export a document from InDesign to e-Pub. However,
she emphasizes that this process is not without difficulties and is not
the best way to approach designing for e-Pub. \*\*\*\* \*\*\*\*

**Subgroups**

After discussing the experiences and expectation with regards to
e-publishing different subgroups were formed. They each discussed their
first ideas, possibilities and expectations for experimenting with
e-publishing and their specific research project. An important starting
point is to decide on what publication to work with and what platform(s)
to use.

 

The groups formed are:

Group nai010 uitgevers – nai01 uitgevers, medamo, Restruct web and
PUNTPIXEL.

Group Valiz – Valiz and PUNTPIXEL

Group BISPublishers & Frame – Essense and Saulie Warmenhoven

Group Institute of Networkculture – Institute of Network Cultures,
Brinka and a developer still to be confirmed.

  In a following meeting the subgroups will finalize their research
plans and will start experimenting with digital publishing. The eventual
goal of these separate research projects is off course to gather the
experiences and “To realise a platform with tools and methods that are
based on open source- standards and tools, with which publishers in art-
and the cultural sector can publish e-publications that are suitable for
several (mobile) devices”
