---
title: DIGITAL PUBLISHING TOOLKIT
author: kimberley
date: 2013-06-27
...

# Digital Publishing Toolkit {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
June 27, 2013 at 4:19 pm.

*![FlorianCramer](imgs/MG_5572-e1372343511153.jpg)*

*A preliminary proposal for the Digital Publishing Toolkitby Florian
Cramer*

The Toolkit should contain two basic elements. On the one hand a “Howto
Document” as a sort of manual, and on the other a “Software Toolkit”
should be compiled off both existing and self-written utilities.

## **PART 1 – A “HOWTO DOCUMENT”**

**CONTENT**The “Howto Document” should not presuppose any technical
knowledge, but become an “e-publishing DIY for dummies”. It should
become an empowerment document in an accessible language providing
cultural sector publishers the know-how to produce e-publications. For
this reason the manual should be released both as an analog and a
digital publication. The target group of this project are mostly still
in the analog world and this publication should help them to make the
step to the digital world. The readers of the document will be: book
publishers, magazine publishers, writers, editors, artists,
graphic/media designers.

**SCENARIOS:** Several scenarios should give insight in the different
possibilities of e-publishing in relation to different circumstances and
contexts. A proposed set of these scenario’s: visual publications,
research publications, periodicals, new types of publications.

**TECHNOLOGY:** Departing from this introduction a technological
overview of pros and cons of – websites, PDF, mobile apps, EPUB2/mobi,
EPUB3/html5/iBook/KF8 – is needed. But also an overview of the strengths
and limitations and the differences between reader software, reader
hardware and different file formats. This document will be out of date
in a few years, but it is still necessary to create such an overview.

**WORKFLOWS:** The problem that likely needs to be communicated the most
is the change in workflows. As a publisher you cannot work the old way –
using InDesign or other print oriented documents as the departure point
for you e-publication. This shift should be explained per scenario with
an emphasis on practical solutions.

**DISTRIBUTION PLATFORMS:** The Pros and Cons of distribution platforms,
like e-bookstores (Amazon, Apple, Google, Kobo, Sony),  online reading
(Scribd , Issuu…), print-on-demand, pirate platforms (AAAAARG, Monoskop,
PirateBay), artist- / designer-run projects (Badlands, KYUR8,
artistsebooks) also need to be discussed.

**GUIDE: DESIGN  YOUR  OWN  E – PUBLICATION: **Eventually a guide will
be developed that addresses per scenario the change in workflow and
indicate ‘for which part you need what’. Presumably it should focus on
EPUB2/3, with an emphasis on EPUB3. It needs to provide a step – by –
step guide clarifying that publishers need to work from well-structured
sources (not from PDF, InDesign or Word documents, but ideally XML-based
documents or more pragmatically, documents in a lightweight semantic
markup language like
[MultiMarkdown](http://fletcherpenney.net/multimarkdown/)) to a final
publication. It should focus on new, relevant insights: Everything that
is covered elsewhere needs to be left out and addressed by a short
summary. For instance Elizabeth Castro’s book “EPUB straight to the
point” on transforming Word and InDesign documents to EPUB already
addresses the pitfalls of working from InDesign, and this should not be
explained in great depth in this manual. Also the results that are too
case-specific should be left out. Cases where you really need an
external professional should be clearly indicated as such, and skipped
as well.

**FLOWCHARTS:** Each workflow should also be visualized in
easy-to-follow flowcharts for each scenario.

**SUMMARY:** The summary should sum up common pitfalls, technological
shortcomings and new opportunities.

**FUTUROLOGY:** Finally a vision for the future will try to answer
‘Where will we be in 2020..?’ What will the reading technology, the
reading culture, the publishing culture look like, what do we expect the
industry and the market to look like.

**APPENDIX:** This should contain a glossary of technical terms, key
word index, bibliography, and a link list.

**FORM OF THE DOCUMENT** (*We will eat our own dog food!)*The developed
workflows will determine how this publication will be approached: The
source format will be MultiMarkdown and the publishing formats will be:
Website / HTML, EPUB, HTML5 app (?), PDF, print book. Thus developing a
publication for each format based on a well-structured source format.

## **PART 2 – SOFTWARE TOOLKIT **

**CONTENT: **As explained, the software toolkit will exist both of
existing software and self-written software. The existing utilities
should be mainly based on open source tools, but essentially there
should be a detailed overview of tools that are vital and necessary for
e-publishing. This could also include restricted freeware and/or
proprietary tools as long as they have something unique to offer and are
worth the financial investment. With regards to the self-written
software, the emphasis should be on simple, reusable code, small tools
that fix common problems. These should all be in the public domain or
released under an open source license.

**FORM: **The existing software should be referenced within the
workflows, but also separately in the manual with URLs. A list of links
to all these tools should be compiled as a website repository and should
be regularly maintained (for example, twice a year through a student
assistant). The self-written software should be part of this website
repository and the source codes should be included in the published
manual where possible.

**DISTRIBUTION: **The distribution of this “Digital Publishing Toolkit”
should address all possible platforms:  All book stores, all online
reading platforms, all pirate sites, all artist-run sites, our own
website, etc.

**MONETIZATION: **There should be an overview of the most relevant
platforms and systems for payment/compensation. This will not be an
overview of business models, but simply technical information on the
payment systems that are available.

## *[Original presentation file (PDF) here.](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/06/presentation-overview-toolkit.pdf)*
