---
title: Wanted: intern with interest in e-books and digital publishing
author: Miriam Rasch
date: 2014-09-4
...

# Wanted: intern with interest in e-books and digital publishing {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Miriam
Rasch](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michael/ "Posts by Miriam Rasch"),
September 4, 2014 at 2:25 pm.

For the further development of its electronic publication strategy –
combining digital and print books and other media – the Institute of
Network Cultures is looking for an

**Intern with a strong interest in digital publishing**3-6 months, 4
days a week, starting January 2015

You will be producing international publications in the field of online
media in different formats (print, PDF, epub). A strong command of the
English language in reading and writing is necessary, as most of the
publications are in English. We are looking for someone with a keen
interest or background in new media, writing & editing and/or the book
industry. It is possible to do research for a thesis within this
internship.

The Institute of Network Cultures (INC) is a media research center that
actively contributes to the field of network cultures through research,
events, publications, and online dialogue. The INC was founded in 2004
by media theorist Geert Lovink as part of the Amsterdam University of
Applied Sciences (Hogeschool van Amsterdam). The institute acts as a
framework sustaining several research projects, conferences, meetings,
with a strong focus on publications. For more information see
<http://networkcultures.org/>. For an overview of all INC publications
go to <http://networkcultures.org/publications>.

We are looking for an enthusiastic, energetic, inquisitive and precise
(former) student with a demonstrated interest in the field of digital
publishing and a desire to learn about books, e-books, and new media. In
addition, you have strong writing and communication skills. Knowledge of
WordPress, html, and social media management is a plus.

**Internship duties include:**

• Digitizing existing publications;

The intern will be a part of a small team within a large institution.
Other tasks within the team may include:

• Attending meetings;

**We offer:**

• The opportunity to be part of a dedicated, informal, and inspirational
organization with extended international networks;

For further information you can contact Miriam Rasch, publications
manager at <miriam@networkcultures.org> or +31 (0)20 5951865.

Applications: if you are interested please send your resume and cover
letter to <miriam@networkcultures.org> before November 1st 2014.
