---
title: Matthew So: Badlands Unlimited: We Make Books in an Expanded Field
author: patricia
date: 2014-05-27
...

# Matthew So: Badlands Unlimited: We Make Books in an Expanded Field {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [patricia](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/murtaugh/ "Posts by patricia"),
May 27, 2014 at 1:54 pm.

![caption](imgs/so.jpg)

Matthew So handles sales, distribution and inventory operations at
Badlands Unlimited. Founded in 2010 Badlands Unlimited publishes
e-books, paper books, prints and artist works in digital and print
forms, and even one book in stone, on a range of topics that do not
cover specific genres. Their publications, So explained, render the
dissolving distinction between books, files and artworks. They have no
plan to start producing Moocs anytime soon, as “Ebooks are cheap and
easy to make.” The basic aesthetic of their press is “whatever we can do
on our own” as there are no developers or programmers working for
Badlands.



Badlands Unlimited is run by the founder and artist Paul Chan and three
staff member amongst which So himself. Chan had the ambition to start a
press of his own, but was at loss as to what kind of books to publish
apart from his own. He decided to publish the work of the artists he
admired, starting with the poetry of Yvonne Rainer, that turned out to
be one of their first publications.

The catalogue of Badlands Unlimited’s publication is small and
remarkable and has included a .gif-filled e-book as an art-advertising
White Pages, titled AD BOOK. AD BOOK consist entirely of ads for
magazines made by various artists and art institutions. “That book paid
for itself before it was on sale.” It is in part a response to the New
York art scene “which seems to be concerned only with networking,
marketing and money.”

*Hell Tree* by digital media artist Petra Cortright is another example
of their extraordinary books. Hell Tree is made up of writings by
Cortright and screenshots of Cortright’s desktop. Countless open widows
with texts and images are juxtaposed; the desktop of a life saturated by
media and media images. Hell Tree displays Cortright’s thoughts during
the course of her workdays; to-do lists interlace with poems, texts and
images pile and are superimposed.

[Book trailer Hell Tree](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tQmRa3DvAsA)

*On Democracy* by Saddam Hussein is an English translation of three 
essays on the purpose of democracy written by the late Iraqi dictator in
his student days. Chan was gifted the essays and later obtained the
rights for the Ebook. *On Democracy* shows the interest of Badlands
Unlimited to press books that are unusual to say the least.

Other publications of Badlands Unlimited include:

*The Afternoon Interviews* – a series of formerly unpublished interviews
with audio fragments of Marcel Duchamp by The New Yorker’s art critic
Calvin Tomkins.

*Think Like Clouds* – a coffee table book composed of an accumulation of
drawings, notes  and scribbles by the art curator and art critic Hans
Ulrich Obrist.

*How to Download a Boyfriend –* a group art show turned into an
interactive Ebook.

[Book trailer How to Download a
Boyfriend](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZrJuBT0VxnA)

Discussions on the book publishing, So argues, should not be about what
the book is as an object or what it is not. “Books always evolve and
change due to changes in it production and distribution methods and
technology.” Badlands, So explained, embraces the fact that the book
form has entered a digital life and advised bookmakers to explore and
seek out what the new purposes of a book can be. The possibilities seem
to be Unlimited indeed.

You can find a PDF of his original presentation here (unfortunately
without the GIF’s): [Presentation Matthew
So](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S4_03_MatthewSo.pdf)

[Badlands Unlimited website](http://badlandsunlimited.com)

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562223](imgs/477911432_640.jpg)
