---
title: Context Without Walls – a generative workflow with EPUBster (Digital Publishing Toolkit November 2014)
author: Becky Cachia
date: 2014-11-30
...

# Context Without Walls – a generative workflow with EPUBster (Digital Publishing Toolkit November 2014) {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Becky
Cachia](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/beckycachia/ "Posts by Becky Cachia"),
November 30, 2014 at 5:40 pm.

The second showcase of the Digital Publishing Toolkit conference
highlighted the collaborative work of the subgroup of
[Valiz](http://www.valiz.nl/), [Meeus
Ontwerpt](http://www.meeusontwerpt.nl/) and
[PUNTPIXEL](http://www.puntpixel.nl/): *Context Without Walls – a
generative workflow with EPUBster*.

The aim of the project was to create a digital (EPUB) version of [Common
Skin](http://www.valiz.nl/en/CommonSkin), a publication within the
series [Context Without Walls](http://www.valiz.nl/en/Plans#col3). This
series of print publications – developed by Valiz and designed by Meeus
Ontwerpt – focuses on contemporary artists worldwide through both essays
and images.

 

![caption](imgs/15279147793_28b308f45e_z.jpg)

**the process of digitalising *Common Skin* was very challenging and
ambitious.** As part of a series with meticulous and extensive design,
it was difficult to do the publication the same justice in a digital
format. To attempt to do so, they created an [online and open source
tool](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/epubster) – called
[EPUBster](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/11/19/developing-epubster/)
– to create, edit and publish this particular publication as well as to
enable other designers, developers and publishers to create their own
digital publications.

 

![caption](imgs/15711295808_a30cb2552d_z.jpg)

*EPUBster* as a web application for the creation and editing of digital
publications. The tool was developed as a general purpose tool, although
it does have some specific functionalities for Valiz and Meeus
Ontwerpt’s “Context Without Walls” series.

Sybesma provided a concise overview of *EPUBster* by running the
audience through the **four main components of the tool’s
straightforward user interface**:

-   its metadata editor;
-   the chapter editor (for the re-arranging of chapters);
-   the functionalities of its content editors (both visual and plain
    text);
-   the design features (to add a book cover and CSS styling).

The four sections create a very flexible workflow in which the user can
switch between sections at any point in the creation process. Once the
user has filled in all the required metadata and finished creating,
editing and styling chapters and content, the EPUB can be generated. You
can read more about the development of EPUBster
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/11/19/developing-epubster/).

 

![caption](imgs/15898137982_08b8b11a73_z.jpg)

*Common Skin* to demonstrate the rich layers of text and imagery they
were presented with. As an academic text, there were a lot of footnotes,
quotes and index words. Therefore, **they created a book that showed
this rich layered text by incorporating many layers around the core
text.** For example, the margins contain index words to serve as both an
entrance to the text and to build a vocabulary for the series.

![](imgs/CWW_Binnenwerk_papier4.jpg)

Janne and Hilde expressed that when they originally started the project
of transforming the book into a digital version, they wanted to retain
and expand on these characteristics that they had developed for the
print version. They started off with a lot of exciting ideas for the
digital version, e.g. incorporating videos and interactive margins, but
they soon realised that, if they wanted the digital book to be accessed
through different devices, they would not be able to incorporate the
characteristics of their dreams. **The only way to retain the potential
for the spread of the book was to focus on making a simple EPUB that
could be read by all devices.**

In doing so, they were restricted in many ways. For instance, they could
only use open source typefaces, margin features where not possible, and
the design elements were, more often than not, stripped from the book,
by the device. **They were left with the question: Is there anything
left to design?**

In describing the process of creating the digital version of *Common
Skin*, Janne and Hilde showed that they were overwhelmed by the feeling
that **EPUBs are not controlled by people but rather by machines.**
Therefore, their role as designers was simply to ensure that they could
produce an error-free publication so as not to disturb the reading
process.

[The end product had to change a lot from the print
version](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/10/08/translating-a-paper-book-design-to-a-simple-e-pub-design/),
e.g. different colours, typefaces, and the elimination of notes from the
margins. After trying to use EPUBster as well as working with PUNTPIXEL
to make EPUBster suit their needs, Meeus Ontwerpt needed to look to
other tools to minimise the amount of problems they were being faced
with. In the end, the EPUB was created using an EPUB editor called
Sigil.

## Reflection

Upon completing the book, Janne and Hilde asked the question, **“What
can the role of the designer be in the digital publishing process, if it
is not only to make an EPUB that is free from errors?”** They now see
the potential for experimentation and feel that there are indeed a lot
of possibilities but they are at present not evident and will only be
exposed through further experimentation.
