---
title: Loes Sikkes: Highlights – EPub Personalizer
author: patricia
date: 2014-05-27
...

# Loes Sikkes: Highlights – EPub Personalizer {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [patricia](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/murtaugh/ "Posts by patricia"),
May 27, 2014 at 1:43 pm.

[![loes](imgs/loes.jpg)]()

The Rotterdam-based graphic designer Loes Sikkes of Medamo, consortium
partner of the Digital Publishing Toolkit, presents the Highlights
research project on which she worked together with nai010 Publishers and
PUNTPIXEL.

Sikkes observed that digital versions of hard copy publications are
often not more than that: a digital, oftentimes a PDF format, of the
analogue publication. That is, the advantages and possibilities a
digital environment has to offer are left unused. How can you avoid
resorting to a 1 on 1 translation of an analogue to a digital
environment?



The starting point of this research project were the *Highlights* and
*Reflections* publications of the nai010 publishing house. Highlights is
composed of images of the highlights of the collection of Amsterdam’s
modern art museum, the Stedelijk Museum, and Reflections is an addition
to this photo catalogue and consists of a series of essays on the art
pieces. The question was: how could they make use of the advantages
e-publishing has to offer, tackle the difficulties, and make it work for
the average visitor of the Stedelijk Museum.

The majority of the visitors of the Stedelijk Museum are 50 years and
older tourists with smartphones. This is the visitor and the device they
had in mind when developing the Highlights Personalizer Application.

The application is optimized for iPhone and iPad and can be used to
prepare for a visit to the museum or as a personal reference, a
personalized catalogue of your visit to the Museum. Personalizing and
filtering are the key aspects of the application. Using the Highlights
Personalizer the user can make a selection of his or her personal
favorites of the museum’s Highlights. With the Highlights Personalizer
the user composes the content, it can decide what kind and how much
information is stored. Based on a large amount of content provided by
the Stedelijk Museum, the user can make a compilation by means of
several selection and filtering criteria and download his personal
Highlights with additional information on the artwork or the artist.

The structure of this open source application is usable for all kinds of
topics. Data collections containing multiple levels of information can
be used. However, there are still some difficulties they need to solve,
for example:

-   What should be arranged to keep the content up to date and how will
    it be managed?
-   How to deal with the copyrights issues on the used images and
    information?

Over the next coming months they hope to solve these issues.

You can find a PDF of her original presentation here: [Presentation Loes
Sikkes](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S3_04_LoesSikkes.pdf)

[![](imgs/477910646_640.jpg)](http://vimeo.com/96562365)
