---
title: Florian Cramer: Electronic publishing in the arts – what works and what doesn’t
author: irina
date: 2014-05-27
...

# Florian Cramer: Electronic publishing in the arts – what works and what doesn’t {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [irina](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/irina/ "Posts by irina"),
May 27, 2014 at 10:30 am.

Florian Cramer announced the soon-to-be-released Digital Publishing
Toolkit – the results of a two year project with publishers and
designers that taps into their practical experiences and difficulties in
developing a number of pilot e-book projects. It furthermore addresses
ways in which publishers can change their internal ways of working so
that releasing one publication simultaneously for print, web, epub and
other formats becomes less painful and more efficient.

According to Cramer, digital publishing promised writers, designers and
publishers exceptional visuals and interactivity combined with easy
distribution and low costs. Examples such as [Art
Circle](http://eu.art.com/asp/landing/artcircles/default.asp) – an
impressive application that brings entire art collections to readers via
beautiful visuals, sound and interactivity – support this ideal.

![](imgs/Florian-Cramer.jpg)

*photo credits: Martin Risseeuw*



So what isn’t currently working in e-publishing? Reality is, argues
Cramer, that most arts and design publishers are small, have low budgets
and can not maintain electronic publications that will continuous
technical updates. Developing interactive applications would require
those publishers to effectively become indie game designers – which is
not workable in a world where books appear in editions between 500 and
1500. To complicate things, digital publishing is still a market in
development. Print book publishing is in a deep crisis (for example,
Rotterdam’s biggest – and only remaining general – bookstore recently
went into bankruptcy) while there is no real mass market for e-books yet
in continental Europe and the Netherlands. What publishers need is
sustainable forms of electronic publishing. What is first needed, he
says, is identification of exact needs. During the Digital Publishing
Toolkit project, Cramer identified the following needs are: platform
independence (the possibility to easily publish content everywhere –
phone, tablet, PC, e-readers), stable formats, and optimized workflows
that simplify the production process.

There are some important choices to be made in e-publishing, Cramer
argued. One example are publishers who want to publish work as e-books
that should better be on the web – but their only reason for choosing
the e-book format is that they haven’t figured out how to monetize web
content. In such cases, e-books and the ePub format are pseudo-solutions
to problems that really lie elsewhere. In other cases, one should not
underestimate the importance of offline reading. You can’t even read an
online electronic publication in the high speed train from Amsterdam to
Rotterdam with its many tunnels and connectivity disruptions.

Some practical issues were brought forth as well. One is the support of
the epub standard on e-readers and e-reading software. It is currently
as bad and as inconsistent as the support of web standards in the web
browsers of the 1990s. Another issue is that software workflows in the
editorial process need rethinking. (Cramer mentioned the Microsoft/Adobe
legacy as unworkable). The technically ideal solution is the document
format XML as a basis from which documents can be automatically
translated into desktop publishing files, web pages and e-books, but in
most cases, XML is too complex and technically demanded for non-IT
companies. A pragmatic solution is to use simplified document markup
languages like MultiMarkdown, which are easy to write and read, and a
good basis for automatic file format conversions, too. Unlike HTML,
which could also be used for this purpose, MultiMarkdown has an
unambiguous syntax that can’t easily lead to incompatibilities when
several people have worked on the same file.

Cramer further discussed costs, a rather sensitive aspect: “the promise
that the electronic publishing is cheaper is a false promise”, he
argues. That is why it becomes important to optimize workflows in the
production process.

Ending his talk, Cramer has an important question for the audience: why
do publishers tend to stick to the traditional formats of publishing
even when they move to e-publishing? He gave the example of poetry
books. Traditionally, poetry is published as poetry volumes because it
is the only economical way of printing, distributing and selling it.
With e-publishing however, it is possible to sell single poems. The same
is true for exhibition catalogues. He gave the recent example of
Stedelijk Museum, the Dutch contemporary art museum. It would have made
no sense to publish its 200-page collection highlights catalogue as one
e-book. But e-publishing makes it possible to turn each monographic
chapter on an individual artwork into a mini-epub of its own, and to
allow readers to choose what they want to explore and read.

The same essential questioning of formats concerns anthologies and
periodicals. Cramer gave the example of the Dutch contemporary art and
theory magazine [Open](http://onelineopen.org/) which successfully
transformed from a print periodical into a web platform. The overall
point here is that traditional publishing formats often don’t follow
some necessity dictated by their content, but rather the technical
necessities of print production, distribution and retail. Since
e-publishing obsoletes many of these necessities, it urges publishers to
rethink those basic formats – rather than simply making books with
multimedia additions.

You can find a PDF of his original presentation here: [Presentation
Florian
Cramer](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S3_01_FlorianCramer.pdf)

*Florian Cramer is a reader for new media in art and design at
Hogeschool Rotterdam, and director of the Creating 010 centre for
practice-oriented research in support of creative professions. He also
is dean of the Parallel University of WORM, the Rotterdam-based
Institute of Avantgardistic Recreation. Last publication: Anti-Media,
NAi Publishers, 2013; What Is Post-Digital?, A Peer-Review Journal
About, 2014*.

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562331](imgs/477910409_640.jpg)
