---
title: Style Guide for Hybrid Publishing
author: Miriam Rasch
date: 2014-10-21
...

# Style Guide for Hybrid Publishing {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Miriam
Rasch](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michael/ "Posts by Miriam Rasch"),
October 21, 2014 at 10:47 am.

The pursuit of hybrid publishing – aiming at different output formats,
both print and electronic, for a single title – means reconsidering your
workflow from the first step to the last. A well thought-through style
guide is essential to make this transition to hybrid publishing
efficient, time- and money-wise. The style guide is sent to the authors
or contributors and defines how you receive your documents or
manuscripts. Adapting your style guide so it fits your hybrid publishing
goals beforehand will save a lot of time in production!

The Institute of Network Cultures has worked on the development of a
hybrid workflow, which is described in detail [on this
blog](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/10/07/hybrid-workflow-how-to-introduction-editing-steps/):
steps for the editor to follow, for the print book designer, and for the
ebook developer. In that manual we start from the point where the
definitive manuscript of the author is handed in and follow as it is
made into a InDesign/PDF document and an EPUB.

However, the workflow will without a doubt gain in efficiency when there
is attention paid to the nascent state of a publication as well: the
style guide used by a publishing house. In what follows the INC style
guide will be given as an example of how to adjust your publishing style
guide in such a way as to cater for a hybrid publishing workflow.

We’ll focus solely on the issues at stake in the transition to a
combined print and electronic workflow and will leave other elements of
the style guide aside. A copy of the style guide as used by the INC can
be downloaded
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/10/Styleguide_INC__2014.pdf).

INC books are published on paper, as PDF, and in print-on-demand and are
freely available from the INC website. For more information on INC
publications, visit
[networkcultures.org/publications](http://networkcultures.org/publications).

—


**Language style**:

**Document Formatting / Layout:**

*General*

- Submissions should be sent preferably in .docx.

- Use only one clean and clear font, the same throughout.

- The whole text should have **Normal** style as default.

- The title and author should have **Heading 1** style, article sections
should have **Header 2** and subsections **Header 3** style.

- Use single spacing between lines.

- Text should be aligned on the left.

- Do not use tabs for paragraph breaks at any time but a white space
between paragraphs.

- Add *italics* where needed (references, emphasis on single words).

- Do not use underlining at any time.

- URLs in the body text should not be clickable.

- All headings and subtitles are capitalized. Capitalize the first word
of the title, the last word of the title, and all nouns, pronouns,
verbs, adverbs, adjectives. Do not capitalize prepositions or
conjunctions unless contain more than 4 letters. For example: Social
Media Monopolies and Their Alternatives.

- Italicize (no quotation marks) proper names such as films, books,
television series, works of art, etc. Song titles, for example, are
placed between single quotation marks, while album titles are
italicized.

- Use the serial comma.

*Footnotes and referencing*

- All references should be auto-inserted footnotes (in other words, no
in text references that use parentheses/brackets). For example, *not:*
Off the Press discusses the question of digital publishing (Lorusso,
2013). *But*: Off the Press discusses the question of digital
publishing.

- All references should also be collected into a Reference list at the
end of the article.

- Always put a period at the end of a footnote, even if it just a URL
(make sure the URL still works).

- Footnote numbers comes after comma/period; this is also the case if
the comma/period follows a quotation mark. I.e.: ‘an alternative
network’.

- URLs in footnotes should be clickable.

- In the footnotes and in the reference list full URLs should be
clickable but not stylized as links (no color or underlining).

- Make sure all references that appear in footnotes also appear in the
reference list at the end of the text.

- Dates in footnotes should be 19 November 2010 (not November 19, 2010).

- For specific formatting of footnotes and reference list, see further
on in this style guide.

*Quotations*

- For quotations longer than four lines use blockquote. Don’t use
quotation marks around a block quote. When needed, use double quotations
marks inside a block quote.

- Commas and full stops should be placed after the quotation mark, if
they’re not part of the quotation.

- All quotations should use single quotation marks except in instances
of a quote inside a quote (in such cases use double quotation marks
inside single quotation marks).

- If ellipsis are used in a quotation because the article’s author has
removed or altered text, for example for the sentence to read
grammatically correctly, be sure to put square brackets […] or [has]
around the ellipsis to indicate this notation is made by the author.


**Images:**

- Authors must have copyright to the images, or permission to use them.

- Images can be in full colour or black and white (note that the print
edition will be black and white).

- Images should be included in the text file at the right position as 72
dpi jpeg and, at the same time, sent separately as 300 dpi tiff
(suitable for for print).

- Files must be properly named and numbered in the following format:
\<Author\_image1.tiff\> / \<Author\_image1.jpg\>

- Include captions below the images. Start with ‘Fig. 1.’ etc. Do not
put image and caption in a table, but write the caption as a normal
sentence under the picture.
