---
title: Program booklet
author: vince
date: 2014-04-14
...

# Program booklet {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [vince](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/vince/ "Posts by vince"),
April 14, 2014 at 11:30 am.

**You can find the program booklet below. Check out the conference
program, sessions descriptions and workshops. Then, be sure to [book
your ticket for the conference
here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/22-23-may-2014/tickets-location/).** 



## Conference Content

Thursday 22 May @Museum Boijmans van Beuningen

Thursday 22 May @WORM

Friday 23 May @WORM

## Bibliotecha @ Off the Press

An instance of Bibliotecha will be present at each venue from Off the
Press. The initial titles present at Bibliotecha@Off the Press result
from a contribution of digital publications relevant to the event,
donated by its organization and participants. The Bibliotecha librarians
encourage anyone in the vicinity to contribute or gain from the present
collection, by logging into the Bibliotecha wifi network and donate or
lend e-books.

This project is initiated by: Lasse van den Bosch Christensen (DK),
Michaela Lakova (BG) http://mlakova.org, Max Dovey (GB)
www.maxdovey.com, Roelof Roscam Abbing (NL) www.roelroscamabbing.nl,
Yoana Buzova (BG) http://oyoana.com/, and André Castro (PT)
www.andrecastro.info

## Thursday 22 May @Museum Boijmans van Beuningen

### 09:30 – 10:00  doors open, coffee and tea

### 10:00 – 11.00  session 1: Today’s Book Publishing

In this opening session of the event we focus on the role of images and
artistic inventions in the publishing domain. Publishing in the arts is
not just about catalogues or art history monographs. How do artists
respond to the growing diversity in platforms and to cross-overs between
paper and digital? What is the status of the image in an increasingly
multimedia world? What artistic strategies can be identified in today’s
networked age, when image and text are starting to have a new
relationship to each other?

Moderator: Geert Lovink

Speakers

### Joost Kircz (NL)

#### The Fashionable Fever of Going Electronic

Art and design books are joining the fashionable fever of ‘going
electronic’. Here, in contrast to novels, images are more important than
text. In the arts the text explicates the image, whilst in many other
genres the image illustrates the text. This fundamental difference makes
an electronic arts book a much more demanding, challenging and
problematic project. Firstly, we encounter the same issues as with
purely textual works; secondly, we have also to address the issues of
image quality, colour control, the spatial relationship between text and
image – and even more than with text – the relationship between ‘items’
(parts of text, images of cutouts) and large repositories, such as those
of museums. Lastly, art printing can choose between many different
qualities and types of paper to print on, but the screen is a glowing,
often flickering substrate; so it must also be decided which substrate
works best for which reader or consumer.

### Alessandro Ludovico (IT)

#### Networks as agents in the clash between personal and industrial
post-digital print

The post-digital print era has definitely begun. On one hand, the boom
in net content or IT process-based artists’ books (with a whole taxonomy
of techniques and approaches), and the collective effort to scan
underground print culture and share it in digital repositories, is
revamping the production and rediscovery of critical content in a
classic form. On the other hand, the unveiling of Google’s huge
industrial scanning plans, the growing unsustainability of newspapers’
business models, the growing role of software in literary and
journalistic production, and the constant fine-tuning of commercial
e-publications’ rules are slowly changing the industrial printed
mediascape. The resulting scenario helps to shed new light onto the role
of networks in these processes, and the possibility of considering them
as agents rather than as media *per se*.

 

## 11:00 – 13.00  Session 2: One Thousand and One Publishing
Workflows, Tools, and Platforms

##   … Shahrazad awoke and signalled to her sister Dunyazad who sat up
and said, “Allah upon thee, O my sister, recite to us some new story,
delightsome and delectable, wherewith to while away the waking hours of
our latter night.” … and thus, on the first night of the Thousand Nights
and a Night, she began…

This panel explores the diversity of tools and processes for publishing
online from highly designed and specialised platforms and content
management systems to more DIY heterogeneous and dynamic toolchains.
What are the advantages and disadvantages of the different approaches. A
group of practitioners representing a range of disciplines and
approaches share their experiences.

Moderator: Michael Murtaugh (USA)

Speakers

### Elizabeth Castro (USA)

### Adam Hyde (NZ)

Adam will talk about his experiences over the last eight years with
different free software tools and methodologies for creating digital
books. Tools include *Booktype*, *Lexicon*, *PubSweet*, *Objavi*,
*BookJS*, *Booki* and others. Methodologies include Book Sprints,
Collaborative Knowledge Production, and others.

### John Haltiwanger (USA/NL)

#### Title: Free Your Objects (And Let the Subject Follow)

Subtitle: Textuality and Reciprocity in the Metastability

Tools evolve reciprocally with their use, as do the users of those
tools. What we can do and what we wish we could do are enabled and
limited not only by the tools we have access to but also by the larger
socio-economic conditions that determine these tools and their modes of
production and operation. Tools actively participate in shaping our
identity as producers, makers, and appreciators. Through the the case
study of a multi-output typesetting workflow that uses only libre
software, the talk will explore  a vocabulary to think differently about
how we work with text today, one that focuses on qualities of
re-composition and the dynamics of a different type of ownership.

### Oliver Wise – The People’s E-Book (USA)

#### Making .epubs easy with The People’s E-book

Oliver Wise from The People’s E-book will walk the audience step by step
through the creation of an .epub using The People’s E-book. He will
explain the advantages of creating something that limits your options
and explain the founding principle of keeping things as simple as
possible. He will also showcase the open source nodejs module ‘pe-epub’
that was developed for The People’s E-book, and expand on the
possibilities for its use in a wide variety of settings.

## 13:00 – 14:00  lunch break

## 14:00 – 15:00  Session 3: Introducing the Digital Publishing
Toolkit

The Digital Publishing Toolkit initiative, a network of two applied
universities and art school research departments, four Dutch art and
design publishers and several graphic and media design bureaus, is
working on an accessible  “how-to” guide for electronic publishing in
the arts along with a collection of open source software tools for
editing and designing electronic books. This session will give an
overview of the Digital Publishing Toolkit initiative research results
and their most interesting findings in the field of electronic
publishing.

Moderator: Margreet Riphagen

Speakers

### Florian Cramer (DE/NL)

#### Electronic publishing in the arts – what does work and what
doesn’t

The computer industry promises for electronic publishing – better
audiovisuality, more interactivity, easier distribution, lower costs,
easier do-it-yourself publishing – often don’t quite match the reality
of what is possible with electronic books and magazines, especially for
small and low budget publishers. On the other hand, there new yet
not-so-obvious opportunities and possibilities for publishers that go
digital. This presentation will summarize some of the general experience
designers and publishers gathered in one year of conducting the Digital
Publishing Toolkit project.

### Miriam Rasch (NL)

#### Hybrid Workflows for Hybrid Publishing

Any publishing workflow that takes into account not only print but also
digital publications – be it a website, an online PDF, ePub or other
form – has to be flexible. In order to be open to different outputs, the
workflow should comprise different strategies and tools – while at the
same time being clear and transferable between authors, editors, and
designers, just as the content is clear and transferable between output
formats and platforms. The INC subgroup tries to establish precisely
that, balancing between technological constraints and possibilities,
between high qualitative standards and a flexible and creative handling
of materials. We hope to present an outcome that illustrates precisely
this: your own personal ePub, collected for you on your own terms from a
range of articles, blogs, photos, or videos. Want to know about social
media without mentioning Facebook? Curious to see a collection of videos
and essays on web search, with a focus on algorithms? What new forms of
personalized publication become possible when editing, compilation, and
design processes themselves become partially algorithmic?

### Pia Pol (NL)

####*Context Without Walls*, Creating ePub3s through the Epubster
Generator

Valiz and the art publicist Daphne Pappers are currently developing a
new series of publications named *Context Without Walls*. The
publications in this series are focused on artists from all over the
world. The books are multilingual and contain essays as well as images.
The paper versions of *Context Without Walls* are being designed by
Meeus Ontwerpt. Valiz, the designers of Meeus Ontwerpt and the
developers of PUNTPIXEL have together attempted to create a digital
version of *Common Skin*, the first publication in the *Context Without
Walls* series. Taking into account the technical possibilities and
questions of design, they have sought a solution for the issues that
arise when turning a paper book into an e-book: the *Epubster*. The
*Epubster* is generator which enables a publisher to create ePub3s with
extensive designs as well as images in the format of a series.

### Loes Sikkes (NL)

#### Highlights – ePub personalizer

### Arjen de Jong (NL)

#### Sketching Skills

The BIS-publisher workgroup set out to research the following issue: how
can we make highly interactive rich media publications, accessible on
multiple devices, at a reasonable cost? They show the problems and
solutions encountered in their case study Sketching Skills, an App
version of Sketching, the bestselling book that teaches sketching to
industrial designers, by Koos Eissen and Roselien Steur.

## 15:00 – 15:30  tea break

## 15:30 – 17:00  Session 4: Showcases

As the field of electronic publishing continues to expand, it is giving
rise to new possibilities in design, distribution and modes of
publishing. A wide range of designers, artists, or (designer/artists as)
publishers will elaborate on their practices, present new approaches to
book design, and give insights into how they are tackling the challenges
of electronic publishing.

Moderator: Kimmy Spreeuwenberg

Speakers

### Joaquín González – visualMANIAC (SP)

#### Setting up an art digital book store, or ‘Working out how to do
something is better than waiting for a magic formula’

visualMANIAC was born with the intention to preserve the role of the
specialist publisher and bookseller in the digital world.

### Michelle Kasprzak – \_V2 (NL/CA)

####The eBook as a Vehicle for Re-dissemination and Creation

In this talk, Michelle Kasprzak, Curator at V2\_ Institute for the
Unstable Media in Rotterdam, will discuss the creation of an eBook
series as a complement to public events at V2\_. The strategies behind
its series of Blowup Readers – including using the series as a vehicle
to mix old and new content, experiment with different forms of
collaborative writing, re-purpose archived material, disseminate
artistic research, and reach new audiences – will be analyzed and
discussed.

### Matthew So (US)

####: Badlands Unlimited: We Make Books in an Expanded Field

Badlands Unlimited publishes books on a varied range of topics that do
not cover specific genres, but which have included a .gif-filled eBook
as an art-advertising White Pages, entitled *AD BOOK*; an English
translation of three essays by Saddam Hussein on the purposes of
democracy, entitled *On Democracy*; a series of formerly unpublished
interviews of Marcel Duchamp by the *New Yorker* art critic Calvin
Tomkins, entitled *Marcel Duchamp: The Afternoon Interviews*; and most
recently, a book of drawings by the art curator and critic Hans Ulrich
Obrist, entitled *Think Like Clouds*.

Matthew So, an associate of Badlands, will speak about the more
important and recent of these titles. A few book trailers will be shown.
Matthew handles sales, distribution and inventory operations at
Badlands. Questions in relation to these functions will be answered, and
unrelated questions will make for interesting conversation.

### Angie Keefer

#### Meta The Difference Between The Two

## 20:00 – 22:00  Digital Arts & Crafts in the Field of Publishing
@Worm

“We pursued distractions and called them enhancements.” This is how
e-book designer Peter Mayers drily summarized the recent history of
experimental digital publishing in the *New York Times*.

It is time to look closely at the plethora of available functionalities
and the value they have beyond the rhetoric of innovation. If not in the
baroqueness of rich media, slick interfaces and smooth gestures, where
does the core of digital publishing lie? What happens when, instead of
asking what e-books can technically do (especially in comparison to
print), we ask how can they be produced, altered, stored and
distributed?

During the session, artists and designers will present their own
practices and approaches to digital publishing that both take advantage
of and question the current modes of content production and
dissemination. The presented cases will open the debate on possible
strategies to build sustainable, networked or hybrid publishing models.

Curator: Silvio Lorusso

Artists

### James Cuddy, Danilo Di Cuia, Roma Levin – Six:Thirty (UK)

#### Experiments in Collaborative Publishing

For the Off The Press conference, Six:Thirty explore the significance of
online networks to the role of the designer. During an experiment at the
V&A museum entitled Collate, the studio set out to co-create a
publication with visitors, using images automatically downloaded from a
creative commons resource. The installation and resulting book represent
a new collaborative approach to publishing, where designers define a
process and users determine the result.

Six:Thirty create new experiences with design and technology. As
designers and technologists they use a broad range of experience to
deliver projects for brands and cultural institutions. Six:Thirty’s work
is realised in branding, creative direction, and user experience design.

### Delphine Bedel, researcher (NL)

#### The Networked Book – Publishing as Artistic Practice

Artists’ books seem not to have yet taken the digital publication as a
means of production and creation of its own, and seem to keep ‘paper
books’ as their model. Facing the complexity of understanding the
challenges of the current revolution in publishing, Bedel’s PhD research
aims to address the transition in the publishing industry and
digitalization of content, from the perspective of the book as a
privilege medium for artists. Shifting from print to software culture,
how are we to frame and create the relevant and urgent critical tools
(theory, softwares), and challenges to be investigated by
artists/publishers? New modes of production, appropriation, distribution
and collaborative practices, as well as extended forms of ‘books’ will
be presented.

### Lukas Jost Gross – TRAUMAWIEN (AT)

#### Ghostwriters and Literary Trojan Horses

TRAUMAWIEN will present the 2012 work GHOSTWRITERS: bots that compiled
and uploaded hundreds of e-books on Amazon.com with text stolen from
YouTube video comments. And the 2013-ongoing work HIJACKED EBOOK
BESTSELLERS AS LITERARY TROJAN HORSES, which uses piracy distribution
mechanisms to massively publish altered/contaminated book contents
exploiting what will be known as ‘native advertising’ in digital
journalism and digital book publishing.

TRAUMAWIEN

TRAUMAWIEN.AT (Vienna, Austria and St. Gallen, Switzerland) published
conceptual digital literature from 2010 to 2013: these included
continuous algorithmic works as well as asynchronous ‘Artclub’ Events
merging theatre, digital literature, acid techno and art exhibitions.
Since 2014 it has focused on a definition of ‘relational publishing’ as
a practice.

### Eleanor Hanson, Oliver Wise – The People’s E-Book (USA)

#### Publishing Constitutes a Public

Oliver Wise and Eleanor Hanson Wise of The Present Group and The
People’s E-book will present an overview of their current and past
projects in order to showcase the different community-based funding
models they use to support their practice. They will present an artistic
production and publishing practice rooted in both the physical and
digital worlds, and how their experiences shaped the building of The
People’s E-book.

The People’s E-Book is a free e-book creation platform for artists,
authors, and alternative presses who want to experiment, publish new
types of books, and push into new territory. After raising almost three
times its Kickstarter goal in 2013, The People’s E-book is now in beta
and its community is outputting reflowable .ePubs for free everyday.

### Manuel Schmalstieg – Greyscale Press (CH)

#### Black holes in the Gutenberg Galaxy: Non-books, anti-books,
maybe-books, and everything in between

This talk will review the latest productions of Greyscale Press, and
expose the promiscuous workflows and methodologies it puts in place to
fit its needs, urges and dreams.

The electronic publishing disruption has induced a range of uncanny
side-effects: print-on-demand spam is lurking on library bookshelves,
publisher-entrepreneurs are buying into the infinite monkey theorem, and
a whole generation of writers is turning SEO-aware. The Gutenberg Galaxy
is full of black holes.

Embracing these phenomena, Greyscale Press deliberately runs against the
tide of analogue-to-digital conversion, turning born-digital materials
into physical forkbombs.

Greyscale Press, a post-digital publishing house, is crafting book-like
artifacts and merging the tool sets inherited from 20th-century
modernist avant-gardes, post-structuralism, the free software and
copyleft movement, and the latest strains of crypto and cypherpunk
activism. Recent publications include *L’Eve future*, a crowdsourced
collection of typographic specimens for over 200 libre and open-source
fonts; *netfahcsnegiE enhO nnaM reD*, a mirrorview edition of Robert
Musil’s *A Man Without Qualities*; and the freshly-launched
*#freespeech* collection, a series of readers on privacy and data
politics.

### Willem de Kooning Academy students (NL)

With the Digital Publishing Toolkit project and its ensuing Off The
Press conference event as a catalyst, second-year students at the
Graphic Design Department of the Willem de Kooning Academy were asked to
research the theme of digital publishing. What are its consequences, its
opportunities, its effects on reading, production, distribution, and so
on? What role can they, as the upcoming generation of graphic designers,
play in the process of ideation and design? How relevant do they feel
that it is?

The first part of the assignment consisted of extensively testing and
reviewing various tools and platforms related to the digital publishing
field. For the second part (still in progress) the students were asked
to apply their findings, not only from the testing of tools, but also
from their design research, to the transformation of a non-digital text
into a digital text. They worked with texts originating from Octavo
Publishers’ publication *Een ruimte om in te bewegen* by Serge Daney.
They translated these texts into a digital publication for computer,
tablet, e-reader or smartphone – with design approaches ranging from the
experimental, critical and provocative to the functional, practical and
all-embracing.

## Friday 23 May @ WORM

## 09:30 – 10:00  doors open, coffee and tea

## 10:00 – 14:30  Workshops

(Please note that there is a limit of 30 participants per workshop, and
it is necessary to buy a separate ticket to participate
(http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/ticket). No prior
knowledge or skills necessary. Bring your own laptop.)

### Megan Hoogenboom (NL) & Harold Konickx

#### Paper to Code: Transforming the Future of Reading

What happens when a visual poem is translated to .ePub 3? Which elements
are lost and which elements have to be added? In this workshop .ePub 3
will be explored on the basis of a transformation of a visual poem. We
will go from paper to code, from page to HTML, from analogue to digital.

Hogeschool van Amsterdam instructor Harold Konickx will select two poems
to work with. During the transformation some elements will have to be
deleted (the page, for example), while others can be added to enrich the
poem (such as hyperlinks and audio files). By working with part or all
of a visual poem the shortcomings and opportunities of the .ePub are
quickly discovered. Every person reads or interprets a poem in their own
way, which results in a different transformation. The different outcomes
also influence the way one reads the original poem. This workshop
provides a creative introduction to .ePub 3: a crash course in .ePub 3
and in making a personal translation of a poem.

### John Haltiwanger (USA/NL) & OSP

#### Electronic Publishing Workflows: (Multi)Markdown & Pandoc

Pandoc is a minimalist open source program that converts documents
between different formats – including HTML, epub, PDF. In conjunction
with Markdown, a way of marking up plain text files with easily readable
formatting signs popular for E-Mail and blogging, it can be used as a
powerful system for publishing in different document formats and media
(web, print, e-book…) from one single source document file.

This workshop will teach participants the practical use of Pandoc and
Markdown, departing from their own particular backgrounds, needs and
expectations. We will take individually selected online texts and
convert them to Markdown. From there we will craft Pandoc translation
templates for HTML/CSS and PDF (using the open source typesetting
framework Context). These templates may be context-specific (only
fitting one particular type of publication) or generic (suitable for a
broad range of publications) as we design them. But they will
nevertheless be universally applicable to any Markdown source document.
Participants will leave with a small arsenal of Open Source, cross-media
typesetting and document generation tools, and their own design
templates for these tools.

### Danja Vasiliev, Michael Zeder & Joscha Jäger

#### Superglue: Reshaping the web?

Web 2.0 promised that everyone could become a free and creative media
publisher, but had exactly the opposite result. Today, most people’s web
content is locked into the proprietary services of only a handful of
Internet social media giants. Individual freedom of expression fits
perfectly in a consumerist environment of templates and themes. Privacy
is not an issue because “we have nothing to hide”. And cloud computing
refers to everything except the clouds of CO2 that are being emitted by
data centres all over the world. Superglue is the successor to Hotglue
([http://hotglue.me](http://hotglue.me/)), a tool to intuitively create
your own website that is being used by thousands of users. Superglue not
only allows Internet users to simply and cheaply design websites, but
also run a energy saving micro-webserver and bring personal data back to
your home and thus truly own it again.

In this workshop you will join the Superglue development team for a
four-hour exploration and alpha testing. Evaluate Superglue and provide
your feedback on its design and functionality. Learn how to build
Superglue websites and find out how to get involved in the project.

Participants will receive a Superglue router and the download links to
the Superglue plugin that enables you to edit your webpage directly in
the browser, and the firmware that turns your Superglue router into a
personal web server. Superglue is ‘hosted’ by WORM
([http://worm.org](http://worm.org/)) together with the Libre Graphics
Research Unit ([http://lgru.net](http://lgru.net/)) and supported by
Stimuleringsfonds Creatieve Industrie
(<http://www.stimuleringsfonds.nl/>) and the European Union
(<http://europa.eu/>).

## 14:30 – 15:00  tea break

## 15:00 – 16:30  Session 5: Underground e-Publishing

Just like mp3 in music, electronic publishing began as a non- or even
anti-commercial subculture: with literary classics freely published by
Project Gutenberg, with underground books and pamphlets such as the
“Principia Discordia” and Abbie Hoffman’s “Steal this Book” circulating
on electronic bulletin boards, computer hackers swapping “disk mags”.
Long before the Amazon Kindle, ASCII e-books and e-zines were popular
underground media, with their own minimalist aesthetics and radical
politics. Since the 1990s, artists and media activists have entered this
field as well, building up pirate libraries with electronic versions of
classical art and critical theory books, and extending the concept of
free software and peer-to-peer file sharing to publishing. What has been
achieved in this culture, what is its status quo, and what can
mainstream publishing learn from it?

Moderator: Florian Cramer

Speakers:

### Sebastian Luetgert (DE)

#### Precarious Publishing, Autonomous Archiving, Collaborative
Collecting

As every Western visitor to South and South-East Asia has to learn, no
such thing as an ‘underground scene’ can be found there, as the required
historical and material preconditions do not exist. What exists, other
than a breathtaking abundance of unattainable material wealth, is
precarity of every hue. And it is precisely precarity, a pragmatism of
leakage and residue rather than a politics of ‘underground’, that
independent publishing initiatives in these regions usually stem from.
As we shift from sharing files to sharing libraries, from a peer-to-peer
to an archive-to-archive mindset, and from building download ratio to
building institutions, the task is to not just acknowledge, but to
actively exploit the practical contradictions faced by publishing
projects outside the Western world.

### Marcell Mars (HR)

#### Free access to resources for every member of society

Public library embodies dreams and fantasies from the past about the
future where it is possible to produce knowledge about knowledge and
where every member of society have free access to these resources. It is
not a surprise that librarians who were dreaming about these
epistemological heavens imagined the world without borders where people
live in piece and prosperity. In only 100 years after Melvil Dewey, Paul
Otlet, Henry La Fontain, Karl Wilhelm Bührer, Adolf Saagert, and many
others were establishing Repertoire Bibliographique Universel,
Mundaneum, Die Brücke – Internationales Institut zur Organisierung der
geistigen Arbeit, League of Nations, International Institute of
Intellectual Cooperation or just helping public libraries all around the
world give access to knowledge to every member of society, only 100
years after, all of these dreams will die with the last of public
library being shut down because of commercial interests of publishers
and austerity measures.

### Dusan Barok (SK)

#### Digital Imprint: the Motion of Publishing

It has become an established fact that virtually all utterances in
digital networks are being recorded. Vast archives spanning the globe –
run not just by information agencies, but by the whole industry in the
widest sense – are storing a treasure trove of mostly raw, unedited
material they do not intend to publish. Regardless of what preventive
measures are taken, the reality of their existence persistently surfaces
through ‘editorial intervention’ (typically in the form of leaks), today
a genre in its own right. Framing this phenomenon as symptomatic of the
presence of digital networks in the very fabric of cultural expression
invites us to rethink the roles we play online. As the subjects of
tracking and surveillance, we tend to view this role as one of passive
acceptance, defense, or an eventual exit. But viewed in light of these
ambiguities, what would it take to reclaim the emancipatory potential of
networking formerly articulated in the positive ‘netizen’ notion of the
*user* by reframing it to those of the *author* and *editor*?

## 16:30 – 17:30 Bazaar and Drinks @WORM

A number of artists, publishers and related practitioners of electronic
publishing will be present during this Bazaar to showcase their projects
in an informal way, looking forward to meeting visitors for
acquaintance, discussion, and exchange of ideas.

#Biographies

## Dušan Barok (SK)

Dušan Barok is an artist, writer and cultural activist involved in
critical practice in the fields of software, art, and theory. He is
founding editor of Monoskop (a wiki for art, culture and media
technology), a graduate of the Piet Zwart Institute, Rotterdam, and a
member of the collective La Société Anonyme.

## Delphine Bedel (NL)

Delphine Bedel works as a photographer, publisher and curator, based in
Amsterdam. She is a PhD researcher at Leiden University/PhDArts and a
founder of Monospace Press. Her awarded editorial work with artists and
designers includes over 60 books. She regularly contributes to books and
magazines and is a frequent speaker at international conferences. She is
also the author of *All that is Solid Melts into Air – Notes on
Tourism*.

Her current curatorial practice focuses on publishing as artistic
practice, and this is also the topic of her PhD research. Bedel has
curated over 40 exhibitions, screenings and lectures series. She has
taught at the Geneva University of Art and Design / MFA (2009-2012), the
Dutch Art Institute/ArTEZ (2009-2011), on the Studium Generale of the
Rietveld Academy, and at the Sandberg Institute, Amsterdam. Her work is
shown internationally.

## Elizabeth Castro (US)

## Florian Cramer (DE/NL)

Florian Cramer is a reader for new media in art and design at Hogeschool
Rotterdam, and director of the Creating 010 centre for practice-oriented
research in support of creative professions. He also is dean of the
Parallel University of WORM, the Rotterdam-based Institute of
Avantgardistic Recreation. Previously, he has been a university lecturer
in Comparative Literature and course director of the Media Design &
Communication Masters programme at Piet Zwart Institute, Rotterdam. Last
publication: Anti-Media, NAi Publishers, 2013; What Is Post-Digital?, A
Peer-Review Journal About, 2014**.**

## James Cuddy (UK)

James studied at Design at Goldsmiths College. Prior to co-founding
Six:Thirty, James worked with a range of design and branding agencies in
London and Barcelona including 4Creative and Base Design.

## Danilo Di Cuia (IT)

Danilo is an interactive developer with a background in graphic design
and a focus in human-computer interaction. With six years of experience
in the development field, he has worked in the US and in the UK for
clients such as ITV, BBC, BHF and many others.

## Adam Hyde (NZ)

Adam Hyde has been on the pioneering edge of publishing since he
returned from an artist’s residency in Antarctica in 2006 and gave up
art to start FLOSS Manuals. Since then Adam has founded many projects
including the first browser-based, end-to-end book production platform
(Booktype) and the Book Sprint methodology. Adam now consults on
projects ranging from the collaborative production of multilingual
lexicons to collaborative academic and scientific research production.
Twitter: @booksprint

## Eleanor Hanson (US)

Eleanor Hanson and Oliver Wise are the co-founders of The Present Group,
a creative studio working at the intersection of art and technology.
They focus on devising and building systems that support creators.
Projects of The Present Group include an art subscription service, a web
hosting service that funds an intermittent arts prize, Art Micro
Patronage (an experimental exhibition platform showcasing and funding
artwork online), The People’s E-book (a free online tool for building
e-books), and Compensation Foundation (an online database for gathering
and displaying information on how cultural producers are compensated).

## Arjen de Jong (NL)

Arjen de Jong is senior designer at Essense, an Amsterdam based service
design agency. He was a founding member of Buro Duplex, a collective of
freelance programmers and designers. He also initiated the Stereo
Publication project, a cross-media publishing project *avant la lettre*.

## Angie Keefer

## Geert Lovink (NL)

Geert Lovink is a media theorist, internet critic, and the author of
*Zero Comments* (2007) and *Networks Without a Cause* (2012). Since 2004
he has been a researcher in the School for Communication and Media
Design at the Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences (HvA) where he is
the founding director of the Institute of Network Cultures. From
2004–2013 he also taught in the New Media Master’s programme at Media
Studies, the University of Amsterdam. Since 2009 he has been a media
theory professor at the European Graduate School (Saas-Fee) and in 2011
he became an associate member of the Centre for Digital Cultures at
Leuphana University (Lueneburg/D).

## Alessandro Ludovico (IT)

Alessandro Ludovico is an artist, media critic, and has been
editor-in-chief of *Neural* magazine since 1993. He has published and
edited several books, and has lectured worldwide. He is one of the
founders of[http://mag.net](http://mag.net/) (Electronic Cultural
Publishers organization). He has also served as an advisor to the
Documenta 12’s Magazine Project. He is Adjunct Professor at OCAD
University in Toronto, and teaches at the Academy of Art in Carrara and
NABA in Milan. He is one of the authors of the Hacking Monopolism
trilogy of artworks (Google Will Eat Itself, Amazon Noir, Face to
Facebook). He is currently a PhD scholar at Anglia Ruskin University in
Cambridge (UK).[http://neural.it](http://neural.it/)

## Joaquín González (SP)

visualMANIAC is an independent book store specializing in art,
architecture, design, photography, film, fashion and visual culture. Its
aim is to offer the best selection of e-books and digital magazines and
to provide art publishers with an uncomplicated way to be present in the
digital environment. For them, editorial goods are more than bundled
paper and beautiful objects to decorate bookshelves. Publishers put a
lot of effort into producing amazing content that ultimately becomes
books and magazines, and we intend to give those products a longer,
richer life. We have managed to build a catalogue containing over 1000
digital titles published by more than 100 international publishers and
art centers. Our books and magazines can be read on computers, iPads and
Android tablets.

## Lukas Jost Gross (AT)

Studied Digital Arts with Peter Weibel, University of Applied Arts,
Vienna. Working and living in Vienna.

## John Haltiwanger (US)

Since arriving in Amsterdam to do a Master’s degree in New Media at the
University of Amsterdam in 2009, John first taught at universities
around the city while participating in the caravan of design,
philosophy, and joy that is Open Source Publishing where he and the
other members worked with artists, collectives, initiatives and public
institutions – but most of all with ideas – until eventually arriving at
a full-time position as a programmer. At night he can be found tinkering
with sounds, amongst other things.

## Eleanor Hanson (US)

Eleanor Hanson and Oliver Wise are the co-founders of The Present Group,
a creative studio working at the intersection of art and technology.
They focus on devising and building systems that support creators.
Projects of The Present Group include an art subscription service, a web
hosting service that funds an intermittent arts prize, Art Micro
Patronage (an experimental exhibition platform showcasing and funding
artwork online), The People’s E-book (a free online tool for building
e-books), and Compensation Foundation (an online database for gathering
and displaying information on how cultural producers are compensated).

## Megan Hoogenboom (NL)

Megan Hoogenboom finished her Bachelor’s degree in Graphic Design at the
Willem de Kooning Academy with two projects. The first was a fictional
new identity for Holland Festival; the second was a book on two
districts in Rotterdam. Both projects were created following a system
and design strategy of her own invention. Working with systems and a
fascination for the transformation from the analogue to the digital
world played a big role in her projects during her Master’s study at the
Piet Zwart Institute. These and other projects can be viewed on her
website[www.meganhoogenboom.nl](http://www.meganhoogenboom.nl/). Another
project is the transformation of the poem *Boem Paukeslag* by Paul van
Ostaijen to .ePub format. In this project all elements of the e-Book
reader were explored by translating the fonts and the design to .ePub
format. Megan is currently working as a independent designer with a
focus on .ePub design. Her latest .ePub can be downloaded at
http://[creating010.com/ebook](http://creating010.com/ebook).

## Joscha Jaeger (GE)

Joscha Jaeger is a freelance interface designer at filmicweb –
Hypervideo Interface Design and a research assistant at Merz Akademie
Stuttgart. His work covers web-based hypervideo technology, search
interfaces, web applications for educational settings, and collaborative
editing systems.

<http://filmicweb.org/>

## Michelle Kasprzak (CA/NL)

Michelle Kasprzak is a curator and writer based in Amsterdam. She is
currently Curator at V2\_ Institute for the Unstable Media in Rotterdam,
the Netherlands; co-curator of the Dutch Electronic Art Festival 2014;
and a member of IKT (the International Association of Curators of
Contemporary Art). Michelle has exhibited and lectured across North
America and Europe. In 2006 she was awarded a curatorial research
residency at the Nordic Institute for Contemporary Art in Helsinki,
Finland; in 2010 she attended the Summer Seminars for Art Curators in
Yerevan, Armenia; and in 2011 she was a guest of the BAM International
Visitor’s Programme in Flanders. She has written critical essays for *C
Magazine*, *Volume*, *Spacing*, *CV Photo*, *Public*, *Mute*, and
several online journals on a wide range of subjects in the realm of
contemporary culture. Her writing has appeared in anthologies and
exhibition catalogues in both Canada and Europe. In 2006 Michelle
founded a leading blog on the subject of curating contemporary art,
Curating.info. She is also an active weightlifter with current personal
records of 80kg squat, 52.5kg bench press, and 90kg deadlift.

## Joost Kircz (NL)

After science studies at the universities of Amsterdam and Utrecht,
Joost joined Elsevier as an international science publisher. Here he
started his research on electronic publishing with a first paper on
database publishing, way back in 1987. In 1998 he started KRA Publishing
Research ([www.kra.nl](http://www.kra.nl/)). In 2006 he joined the HvA
as a part-time lector on electronic publishing, and as of 2010 he has
coordinated its electronic publishing programme. He chaired two
conferences,[the Unbound
Book](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/outofink/unbound-book-2011/)
and[Boek uit de
Band](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/outofink/boek-uit-de-band-2012/).
The proceedings of the first conference were recently published by
Amsterdam University Press. All his publications are available on
the[KRA](http://www.kra.nl/) website.

## Roma Levin (RU)

Roma is a Russian born art director with a background in design and
advertising. Before co-founding Six:Thirty, Roma worked in Moscow and
London for a variety of clients ranging from Tate to Sir Bryan Ferry.

## Silvio Lorusso (IT)

Silvio Lorusso is an Italian artist and designer. His ongoing PhD
research in Design Sciences at IUAV University of Venice is focused on
the intersections between publishing and digital technology from the
perspective of art and design. He regularly collaborates with the
Institute of Network Cultures in Amsterdam. After he received his MA in
Visual and Multimedia Communications in 2011, he spent a period of study
at the Networked Media course of the Piet Zwart Institute in Rotterdam.
He took part in exhibitions, festival and events such as Transmediale
(Germany), Unlike Us (Netherlands), and Fahrenheit39 (Italy). He has
written for blogs and magazines such as *Progetto Grafico* and
*Doppiozero*. He launched the Post-Digital Publishing Archive
(p-dpa.net) in 2013.

## Sebastian Luetgert (DE)

Sebastian Lütgert, a.k.a. Robert Luxemburg, is an artist, programmer and
writer. He is a co-founder of Bootlab and Pirate Cinema Berlin, software
developer in residency at CAMP in Bombay, and the initiator of several
online media archives, most
notably[textz.com](http://textz.com/),[0xDB.org](http://0xdb.org/),[Pad.ma](http://pad.ma/)
and[Indiancine.ma](http://indiancine.ma/). His artistic work has been
exhibited internationally since the late 1990s, and his writing has been
published in *FAZ*, *Süddeutsche Zeitung*, *taz*, *Jungle World* and
*e-flux Magazine*, among others. He is currently working on a fictional
documentary film set in Dubai.

## Marcell Mars (HR)

Marcell Mars is one of the founders of Multimedia Institute â€“ mi2 and
net.culture club mama in Zagreb. He initiated Public Library, GNU GPL
publishing label EGOBOO.bits, started Skill sharing in mama + Skill
sharing’s satellites g33koskop, ‘Nothing will happen’ and ‘The Fair of
Mean Equipment’.

Marcell participated in curating/producing mi2 yearly exhibitions: I’m
still alive (2001), re:Con and Freedom to creativity! (2005., 2006.
2007.) and in conceptual exhibition System.hack() (2006).

When in Zagreb Marcell hangs out in Hacklab in mama, in Belgrade runs
Wonder of technology, Hackers lenses and Programming for non-programmers
at Faculty of Media and Communication. Through 2011-2012 did a research
Ruling Class Studies at Jan Van Eyck in Maastricht. In 2013. he was
fellow at Akademie Schloss Solitude in Stuttgart.

## Michael Murtaugh (US)

Michael Murtaugh (automatist.org) designs and researches community
databases, interactive documentaries, and tools for new forms of reading
and writing online. He teaches in the Master’s Degree programme in Media
Design and Communication at the Piet Zwart Institute in Rotterdam, and
is a member of Constant in Brussels.

## Miriam Rasch (NL)

Miriam Rasch started working as a publication manager at the Institute
of Network Cultures in June 2012. She holds Master’s degrees in Literary
Studies (2002) and Philosophy (2005). Since graduating she worked as a
(web) editor and from 2008 on as a programmer for the Studium Generale
public lectures department at Utrecht University, organizing events and
taking care of digital broadcasts and online representation. She also
worked as a lecturer for Liberal Arts and Sciences, and is teaching
philosophy and media theory in the Media, Information and Communication
department. She writes book reviews and guest posts for different
websites and magazines; her personal blog can be found on
miriamrasch.nl.

## Margreet Riphagen (NL)

Margreet Riphagen started working at the Institute of Network Cultures
(INC) in March 2008 and is involved in various research projects. She
holds a Master’s degree in Information Science (Human Centered
Multimedia), a post-Bachelor’s degree in Business Science, and a
Bachelor’s degree in Communication Management. Besides working at the
INC at the Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences’ Knowledge Centre,
CREATE-IT, Margreet also works for the MediaLAB Amsterdam, part of the
knowledge centre. Before this Margreet worked at Waag Society and Media
Guild for over five years.

## Pia Pol (NL)

Pia Pol (Amsterdam, 1985) is Deputy Publisher at Valiz book and cultural
projects in Amsterdam with whom she has worked since 2008. She received
a BA in English Language & Culture and and an MA in American Studies
from the University of Amsterdam. She has been working in the (art) book
trade for over ten years, principally in book stores, international
distribution, and publishing. At Valiz she focuses on production and
digital development.

pia@valiz.nl,[http://valiz.nl](http://valiz.nl/)

## Manuel Schmalstieg (CH)

Manuel Schmalstieg (1976) is an artist, designer and educator, operating
in the murky area between media art and hacker communities. A graduate
of HEAD Geneva and ASP Kraków, he founded multiple collaborative
entities, including *N3krozoft Ltd* (in 2001) and *Aether9* (in 2007).
Since 2008 he has run Greyscale Press, a postdigital publishing house.
As a web designer and free software enthusiast, he is a contributor to
the WordPress platform, and has kickstarted a lively local community in
Geneva. He is currently guest editor of *Libre Graphics Magazine*, for
an issue dedicated to the Libre Type Design movement.

## Loes Sikkes (NL)

Loes Sikkes graduated *cum laude* in Globalization and National
Identities. Since 2004 she has worked as a graphic designer, setting up
multiple design studios, such as Medamo (a young Rotterdam-based design
bureau founded in collaboration with Barbara Lateur) in 2012. Signifying
Medamo’s approach is the drive with which they translate new insights,
approaches and social involvement into a clear design. Conceptual and
strategic design solutions evolve through thorough analysis and
research. They cross the traditional borders of the profession and feel
most at home where graphic design, new media and typography meet. In
addition, she has been working at the Willem de Kooning Academy as
department coordinator of the visual communications programme, and
giving lessons on publication to the illustration department.

## Kimberley Spreeuwenberg (NL)

Kimberley Spreeuwenberg is a new media researcher and graphic designer
with a special interest in the areas where these two disciplines
intersect. She is currently project coordinator of the Digital
Publishing Toolkit research project initiated by the Institute of
Network Cultures, with whom she collaborates regularly, and teaches at
the Willem de Kooning Academy in Rotterdam.

## Matthew So (US) – Badlands Unlimited

Badlands Unlimited is a New York-based American publisher of e-books and
paperback books with an emphasis on contemporary art, culture and
politics.

The company was established in 2010 by Paul Chan, a New York-based
artist, as a platform to publish the writings and works of emerging and
established artists whom Chan respects and champions. Since 2010
Badlands has also published obscure and controversial historical works
and one romance novel.

Chan considers Badlands as not only a press but also a publishing
experiment. He has written:

‘Historical distinctions between books, files, and artworks are
dissolving rapidly. We publish and produce new works by artists and
writers that embody the spirit of this emerging dissolution. We make
books in an expanded field.’

## Danja Vasiliev (RU)

Danja Vasiliev has been involved in computer technology events, media
art exhibitions and seminars around the world since 1999. He has
received several awards and mentions at Ars Electronica, Japan Media Art
Festival, and Transmediale, and is one of the creators of Hotglue.

[http://k0a1a.net](http://k0a1a.net/)

## Patricia de Vries (NL)

Patricia de Vries is a project coordinator at the Institute of Network
Cultures and is responsible for coordinating MoneyLab: Coining
Alternatives. She has an academic background in Media Studies (BA),
Cultural Analysis (MA) and Liberal Studies (MA). She has previously
worked as a film programmer, researcher, and art magazine editor. From
2010 until 2012 she was based in New York where she worked as a research
associate at the World Policy Institute think tank and as a teaching
assistant of Professor James Miller at The New School for Social
Research.

## Oliver Wise (USA)

Oliver Wise and Eleanor Hanson are the co-founders of The Present Group,
a creative studio working at the intersection of art and technology.
They focus on devising and building systems that support creators.
Projects of The Present Group include an art subscription service, a web
hosting service that funds an intermittent arts prize, Art Micro
Patronage (an experimental exhibition platform showcasing and funding
artwork online), The People’s E-book (a free online tool for building
e-books), and Compensation Foundation (an online database for gathering
and displaying how cultural producers are compensated).

## Michael Zeder (DE)

Michael Zeder is engaged with research into and the development of tools
for an information society. He works currently on systems of knowledge
distribution and learning environments. For Superglue, Michael designed
the client-side software architecture and an interactive development
system.

<http://michaelzeder.de/>
