---
title: Joost Kircz: Going Electronic
author: irina
date: 2014-06-05
...

# Joost Kircz: Going Electronic {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [irina](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/irina/ "Posts by irina"),
June 5, 2014 at 1:08 am.

![](imgs/Joost.jpg)

*A post by Mathijs Weijers*

Joost Kircz was the first speaker of the 2-day conference “Off the Press
– Electronic Publishing in the Arts”, organized by the Institute of
Network Cultures. From 2006 till 2013, Kircz was a part-time lecturer on
electronic publishing within the Amsterdam University of Applied
Sciences (Hogeschool van Amsterdam), and currently he is involved with
the Digital Publishing Toolkit research project. He regularly publishes
his findings on his personal website, [www.kra.nl](http://www.kra.nl/).

Kircz’s presentation was about the various technical requirements and
design standards that different types of electronic books need.
“Electronic book publishing in the Arts is a multifarious adventure. On
the one hand, electronic publishing is already an unclear notion and on
the other hand the notion ‘Arts’ is something nobody agrees on anyway”,
Kircz mused. He then introduced The Digital Publishing Toolkit, a
project initiated by the Institute of Network Cultures in partnership
with [Knowledge Center Creating 010](http://creating010.hr.nl/) of the
Hogeschool van Rotterdam, and a number of publishers: “with this toolkit
we want to be able to refrain from deep philosophical preoccupations and
– as this conference will prove – are able to develop methods and
techniques that help publishers, editors and authors to use electronic
means to recreate old works and to create novel ones”. He argued that we
must see Electronic Publishing as complimentary to print publishing and
not just a change from paper-to-screen. What publishers need, and what
the toolkit aims to provide, is easy to use, open source software (more
about the Digital Publishing Toolkit, which is due to be release by the
end of this year, can be read
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/aboutus/)).

Kircz argued that one of the most important features from the electronic
medium is its active memory, “a memory that allows for endless reuse and
multiple presentations on a great variety of substrates”. What he also
pointed out is that content stored in an electronic memory cannot be
read by humans. It is instead stored in a coded form: “(…) the most
important conclusion we can draw from the fact that we use structured
coded information as basis for book production, is that this demands new
working methods throughout the whole process from author to reader. As
soon as we take a step away from just a replication from the printed
page, our design, our editorial practises, as well as our production and
dissemination will change from bottom to top and back”, Kircz warned.

Different types of publishing materials might require different
treatment. Kircz laid out four major toolkit scenarios:

1\) Art/design catalogue;

Each kind of publication needs a different kind of approach in terms of
use of metadata. What we read in a digital publication has much of this
meta structure surrounding it, but we do not see it (i.e. a simple
sentence like “ All you need is love” is in fact written in, for
example, HTML code: \<quotation\> All you need is love \</quotation\>).
This metadata can be used to specify and design almost any desired
content and outcome but can also be complex to use.

What publishers need then is easy, readable software to work with. Kircz
offered a short history of existing Mark-up Languages that address this
need:

-   SGML (1982) – which he described as the mother of all other coding
    languages;
-   HTML 5 (most up-to-date ) – which is readable for humans;
-   Epub3 (most up-to-date) –  a competition to HTML5.

What the Digital Publishing Toolkit aims to do is add further resources,
tools and software to this list and aid publishers in their e-publishing
endeavours.

Kircz concluded that “(…) the central issue of our toolkit project is
that we consciously try and define the creation, production, and
consumption of a creative object as one single process. We try and
experiment to create a production pipeline of illustrated texts or
textually explicated collections of images in such a way that right from
the beginning we understand, and appreciate that electronic publishing
is more than reworking existing works, but a new creative branch in
human expression.”

You can find a PDF of his original presentation here: [Presentation
Joost
Kircz](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S1_01_JoostKircz.pdf)

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562227](imgs/477909407_640.jpg)
