---
title: Showcase nai010 uitgevers | My Collection
author: roserowson
date: 2014-11-30
...

# Showcase nai010 uitgevers | My Collection {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [roserowson](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/roserowson/ "Posts by roserowson"),
November 30, 2014 at 8:55 pm.



[![Mark de Bruijn of PuntPixel](imgs/15896794701_c77552a06c_o.jpg)]()
Mark de Bruin of PuntPixel



During the showcase for [nai010 uitgevers](http://www.nai010.com/en/),
we were shown a new mobile application developed by PUNTPIXEL and
[Medamo](http://www.medamo.nl/). [My
Highlights](http://puntpixel.nl/myhighlights-uit-de-collectie-van-het-stedelijk-museum-amsterdam/)
lets users create their own, personal ePub from the collection of the
[Stedelijk Museum](http://www.stedelijk.nl/en) in Amsterdam. The
application allows users to search by genre, period, artist and so on to
assemble their own personal impressions from the collection, and
prioritise content. Presenters Marc de Bruijn and Barbara Lateur noted
that this form of curation could be used, for example, by a layman
wishing to plan their visit to the museum, or a student planning for
their thesis. Moreover, the model could easily be transferred to any
practice with diverse and structurable data requiring this type of
cataloguing, such as a stamp collection.

When demonstrating the application via an iPhone projection, Marc de
Bruijn showed how to navigate the interface of My Highlights.
Information on different pieces in the collection is available for free,
while users may choose to pay a small amount for additional material
such as essays on artists and individual works. This aspect of the
application is still in development; when it is fully operational, users
will be able to compile their ePub, pay for any additional content using
an inbuilt payment gateway and export their final product, to be viewed
online within My Highlights, or offline in the external application of
their choice.

The mock-up version of the iOS application de Bruijn showed us was
created using Phonegap and WordPress to mimic the functionality of the
final version. As an application concerned with creating ePubs, de
Bruijn noted that the final versions of user curated ePubs may well be
viewed in an external application. With the wide range of these
applications available, this is arguably a concern for any group in the
business of producing ePubs. Upon its launch, we shall see how
successfully content from within My Highlights can be viewed outside of
its sleek interface.

[![](imgs/499982559_640.jpg)](http://vimeo.com/114339866)
