---
title: From print to what?
author: kimberley
date: 2014-09-25
...

# From print to what? {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
September 25, 2014 at 4:39 pm.

## Changing work patterns in electronic publications

The Toolkit project aims to assist smaller publishers in the art and
design sector to make their first steps in producing their books and
periodical through digital means. This aim turns out to demand a fairly
complicated road to final success. First of all, changing over from
print on paper to digital media is not the same as, say, changing from
an old-fashioned manual typewriter to an electronic typewriter. The
change implies a rethinking of the whole production process from author
to reader.

The first and most important new feature is that we lose the fixed page
as a pivotal reference. In paper production, we can, in principle,
change the book formats at will, but we are completely accustomed to a
very limited number of book formats. This fact is not a plot or ruse,
but the result of centuries of experience with readability,
manufacturability, portability and ease of use.

Unfortunately, we cannot transpose all our current experience and
knowledge about typography and layout, lock – stock – and – barrel, to a
digital environment. The sizes of reading screens are not standardized,
and, even worse, we can easily flip from a vertical page to a horizontal
page, with all the accompanying, associated layout problems such as the
position of illustrations in the text and the lengths of sentences.
Readers can change the type size and even the font at will, which
severely constrains the layout freedom of the designer and, most
frighteningly, not every electronic reading device allows for the same
presentation, as soon as we go beyond the simple text with the odd
illustration.

Hence, the toolkit project strives to find common ground based on the
most general but standardized and reusable techniques we have today. The
project doesn’t want to show what is possible in principle and how
wonderful the future will be, but to help the smaller publisher who
wants to team up in the digital storm to produce decent electronic
versions of their list. In our endeavour, we opted for the open source
EPUB3 format as end product of the production chain. At present, it is
the most versatile standard and as it is well-structured, we assume that
it will become translatable into newer, more powerful, standards in the
future. EPUB3 is already an accepted standard for novels, which makes it
a good basis for our Toolkit.

***Who wants more, or more precisely, who wants what?***In discussions
with smaller publishers, and in particular, with our partners in this
project, it became clear that the background, traditions, demands and
vistas are all quite different. These differences are a result of the
level of use of and love for new technologies and approaches as well as
the character of the publications themselves. A well-composed arts book
with good lay-out by an artist her/himself is a *pièce d’art*in itself
and, e.g., the format of the book, is part of the whole concept of the
product. It goes without saying that we can reproduce such a book in any
format, like making a postcard from Rembrandt’s Night Watch, but this is
not the same thing as the creation of a digitally-born novel book type.

Thus, in order to cater for various demands from various publishers, we
must make a distinction between categories of approach.

\(i) The first category is the publishing house itself that simply wants
their book to be readable on a standard ereader or tablet without
frills, just as we see novels being easily transposed from paper to
various screens. In this case, the most important issue is that the text
and the illustrations are kept together and that the lay-out, as far as
possible, remains the same. In this case, we have two options: do we
freeze the page in PDF-format, which allows the presentation of the
PDF-version into any available media, or do we translate the pages, as
they are, into a simple EPUB version that allows for so-called
reflowable text on an e-reader or tablet. Nothing more, nothing less. In
this case, digital publishing is just the next step in the existing
traditional product chain.

\(ii) The second line of attack is to step into the cold waters of the
endless digital data sea and try to start from a digital approach in
order to be able to publish a variety of publications based on a
base-set of author-created texts and illustrations. Print on paper will
be one outcome, but this is not the starting point. Here, we have to
rethink the production process and redefine our production chain; as
well as that; we have to look more carefully into the instructions to
our authors, as they will also need to change their habits by changing
to new electronic writing aids.

\(iii) The final category is the extension of the previous one, namely
the conversion into a real database of texts, illustrations and
multimedia objects from which a myriad of different products can be
created, depending on demand, technological environment, level of
complication, etc. Such a modular, Lego-block-like, structure demands a
developed understanding of what a base- brick of information is, and to
what extent the integrity of the flow of the author’s reasoning and
intention is kept.

***Workflow***Obviously, a publisher is not always familiar yet with
what can be done in principle and what the market is demanding. A
multitude of software acronyms representing at least so many software
products and/or protocols blows in the wind like autumn leaves. The
claims are sky-high and therefor become impenetrable for most smaller
publishers.

For these reasons in our Toolkit project, we start from simple standard
wordprocessor files, which we clean from unnecessary embellishments and
subsequently structure them to the extent defined by the demands of the
end product, such as levels of headings, footnotes, illustrations,
active objects, etc. From the structured files, we enable the publishers
to translate their works into EPUB3, as basis for a publication on a
digital device screen, as well as for the possible translation into a
web-page or a printed product.

The old saying in the computer industry “garbage in, garbage out” is
true here as well. For this reason, publishers must get accustomed to
instructing their authors in such a way that the translation chain from
manuscript to reading device is easy and transparent. Only if the
publisher herself understands the new workflow, can the author
understand how to submit work in such a way that the maximum of
publication outlets can be reached without any too heavy editing.

Our Toolkit enables the user to start from old-fashioned MSWord files
and following the correct procedures to see the light of the tablets and
ereaders allowing reading well-designed pages which are fit for re-use
and multiple use, without much further ado.
