---
title: Showcase BIS Publishers | Phone gap & multi-channel publishing
author: roserowson
date: 2014-11-30
...

# Showcase BIS Publishers | Phone gap & multi-channel publishing {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [roserowson](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/roserowson/ "Posts by roserowson"),
November 30, 2014 at 8:51 pm.

Presenting on behalf of the design agency
[Essense](http://essense.eu/about/ "Essense"), Arjen de Jong began by
positing the essential question for working with [BIS
Publishers](http://www.bispublishers.nl/index.php) to create an ebook:
**(How) can we make rich media, highly interactive publications,
accessible on multiple devices at a reasonable cost?**



![](imgs/15712746169_68c3084661_o.jpg)
Arjen de Jong presenting for Essense



As a publishing house, BIS is renowned for its innovative approach to
graphic design and visual culture as a whole; in order to fittingly
represent their brand in the field of digital books, it was essential
for Essense transfer this rich media approach. But how can this be
achieved in the digital realm, especially when combined with additional
characteristics such as interactivity and cross-device compatibility?
The inclusion of these specifically digital elements to a book allows
greater scope for creativity, while simultaneously causing potential
problems of executability.

One interactive element de Jong identified was the potential
non-linearity of digital books. On a “page” level, they could include
individual interactive panels, but beyond this they could also allow
readers to jump in between different sections of the text, while still
maintaining a sense of wholeness of the book. This potential flexibility
of the medium is demonstrated and hindered by readers using multiple
devices. While this allows greater levels of portability and
multichannel engagement for users, it also creates a greater level of
complexity for designers, who must ensure that content translates well
across devices.

While multiple device use is common, de Jong and his team made the
decision to focus their ebook development on tablets. He cited a reason
for this as, firstly, the inability for e-reader hardware such as a
Kindle that uses e-ink to show the kind of rich media that was required
for the publication, and secondly, that the e-reader has been
transforming into a more tablet-like device, shown, for example, by the
Kindle Fire. The focus on tablets furthermore allowed access to open,
flexible and sustainable formats: ideal conditions for developing a new
way to view e-publications.

After trying to work with various different developing tools and
identifying their shortcomings for tackling the task at hand, Essense
settled upon
[PhoneGap](https://creative.adobe.com/products/phonegap-build), due to
its usability, integration of web code and compatibility across
platforms via the Cloud. Experimenting with
[Markdown](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown) to write their code on
multiple channels, transforming it into HTML and then transferring it
into Phonegap, de Jong and his team were pleased with their results but
nonetheless acknowledged that there was still some way to go towards
perfecting the kind of e-publication they were setting out to make.

In this brief presentation, de Jong demonstrated that creating an
e-publication to fit the specifications of a client is often easier said
that done. The integration of the myriad potentials for these digital
books is often as much of a hindrance as it is inspiring. Nevertheless,
from the work that has been done by de Jong and his team, it is clear
that this kind of e-book is certainly possible, and opens up creative
doors for innovators such as BIS Publishers.
