---
title: Marcell Mars: Free access to resources for every member of society
author: irina
date: 2014-05-28
...

# Marcell Mars: Free access to resources for every member of society {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [irina](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/irina/ "Posts by irina"),
May 28, 2014 at 1:16 pm.

The final session of the “Off the Press: Electronic Publishing in Arts”
conference approached another side of the e-publishing field, namely
what happens after the e-books are launched: where do we distribute,
store and manage them?

In traditional publishing, perhaps the most iconic actor to play this
role is the public library. However, as Mars pointed out in his talk,
the public library itself is currently under a financial, social and
political threat. Furthermore, there is still the question which actors
can take up its role in the virtual world. Proprietary platforms like
Google or Amazon have already stated their ambitions to become such
global knowledge keepers, but this comes with the danger of intellectual
copyrights and censorship. Mars, alongside with the other speakers of
this session, discussed the existing alternatives: open, collaborative,
non-proprietary platforms. How can they be designed to best fit the role
of public libraries, and how should they adapt this role online?

[![Marcell Mars photo](imgs/Marcell-Mars-photo.jpg)]()



Mars is a hacker, activist and researcher with a strong interest in book
sharing and book hacking. He began by explaining the very narrative
associated with the public library concept. The latter, he argues,
embodies humanity’s dream of an epistemological heaven. The thought of
being able to generate knowledge about knowledge has always been an
ideal often reflected in philosophy as well (take the example of Leibniz
and his proposal to have a language so formal that it would explain and
recreate everything – much like humanity’s hopes with the public
library). In reality, however, public libraries were built after the
French revolution in the 19^th^ century and were far from the ideal of
open access to everyone, argues Mars. In this sense, public libraries
have always been gripped by politics – one example is that access is
conditioned to being a citizen (have a valid ID card and residence
within the city/country, which excludes vulnerable groups such as
refugees or immigrants). The public libraries world-wide are furthermore
constrained by financial cuts and even shut-downs. They are not able to
buy books and borrow them, since publishers agree only on licensing
contracts – a problematic proprietary regime.

In this context, what vision of public library should we strive for in
the digital world?

Mars identifies [three essential pillars of the public
library](http://www.memoryoftheworld.org/blog/2012/11/26/end-to-end-catalog/)
that also translate to the digital ones: **free access, a library
catalogue and the librarian**.

Mars strongly advocates for **free access** of resources for everyone,
instead of access by means of identification. The **library catalogue
equivalent online is the web index**, argues Mars. Essentially, whoever
has a more powerful and refined way of indexing all the knowledge is in
fact seizing it altogether. Google is currently the most famous player
when it comes to indexing, in close competition with Amazon’s index.
Monopolization is dangerous, warned Mars. Instead, he supports the idea
of having many more, alternative and collaborative indexes, thus
decentralizing the process of knowledge sharing. In this vision, anyone
can become a librarian, and “**when everyone is librarian, library is
everywhere**”. He gave the example of
[Calibre](http://calibre-ebook.com/demo) – a platform where users can
manage their own e-books, convert to different formats, tag, search,
share, download (but also purchase from publishers), and connect with
other users. The major strength of Calibre, Mars points out, is that its
technical design allows sociability. With Calibre, a user can connect
any PC to the Calibre built-in server and thus has access to their
e-book collection, as well as to the network of Calibre librarians
everywhere. The capability to use independent servers rather than via
third-party providers is also desirable in order to protect these online
catalogues.

Mars also mentioned a number of other online collections and platforms
for e-book sharing, among which are [aaaaarg.org](http://aaaaarg.org/),
[LibGen](http://lib.freescienceengineering.org/),
[UbuWeb](http://www.ubuweb.com/) or
[Monoskop](http://monoskop.org/Monoskop). While some are just online
depositories, others host entire communities of librarians, researcher
and readers. In the end, the purpose is not to have just one universal
(digital) public library, but rather many small ones that work in a
decentralized, collaborative manner.

*Marcell Mars is one of the founders of Multimedia Institute â€“ mi2 and
net.culture club mama in Zagreb. He initiated Public Library, GNU GPL
publishing label EGOBOO.bits, started Skill sharing in mama + Skill
sharing’s satellites g33koskop, ‘Nothing will happen’ and ‘The Fair of
Mean Equipment’. His full biography
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/22-23-may-2014/biographies/).*

[![](imgs/477911980_640.jpg)](http://vimeo.com/97508731)
