---
title: Joaquín González – Setting up an art digital book store, or ‘Working out how to do something is better than waiting for a magic formula’
author: jakubdutka
date: 2014-05-27
...

# Joaquín González – Setting up an art digital book store, or ‘Working out how to do something is better than waiting for a magic formula’ {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [jakubdutka](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/jakubdutka/ "Posts by jakubdutka"),
May 27, 2014 at 9:18 pm.



![](imgs/14058050377_2830bffb1d_z.jpg)
Joaquín González



Joaquín González is the executive director of
[visualMANIAC,](http://visualmaniac.com/)a Madrid-based, independent
distributor of digital books and magazines. visualMANIAC specialises in
publications from the domain of art, design, photography and
architecture. Their books are accessible on iPads, Androids and
computers.

As Joaquín remarked at the very beginning of the session, when he bought
an iPad back in 2011, he was fascinated by it, yet the market of digital
publications he could access left a lot to be desired. While some
magazines had already begun experimenting with apps, in the field of
visual culture and arts there was nothing. The founders of Visual Maniac
decided to fill in the niche and explore the possibilities that the
digital publishing offered.

Having received positive feedback on their plans from many separate
publishers, Joaquín and his friends decided to put their plans into
practice. The first obstacle they encountered, however, was the choice
of format for their publications. Out of all the formats available, they
chose PDF for its well-rounded features and the preservation of the
visual layout (as opposed to the austerity and re-flowability of EPUB).
Preserving the unique nature of each publication, as well as the high
quality of pictures, was of essence. While PDF clearly has its
limitations, mainly its ‘flatness’, team at Visual Maniac worked to
modify it to allow for ‘enhanced’ content like video and sound links,
yet this extended form is not yet embraced by publishers.



![](imgs/14244322224_2d120f688b_z.jpg)
Joaquín González explaining the tough choices Visual Maniac had to make



visualMANIAC clients can add their purchases to their accounts and
access them from any device. On top of that, users can take advantage of
online reader and tablet apps, however the content is not available on
e-readers and phones.Visual Maniac collaborates with over 100 publishers
and offers over 12000 publications in their catalogue.

Another obstacle Joaquín and friends encountered in their work is that
publishers are constantly overworked and lack the time to involve in
innovative attempts. Subsequently, the ownership of copyrights is
stopping some publishers from moving to digital formats. Furthermore,
publishers desire a perfect product, one that would be cheap (or,
ideally, free) to produce and easy to use on a variety of devices. The
situation on the market is not easy either, because, as Joaquín
explained, it is challenging to attract potential readers and it’s even
harder to make them buy. As a solution to the harsh market
situation, Visual Maniac started offering its services to institutions.

visualMANIAC wants to become an international ‘go-to’ publisher for
everyone who is interested in digital publications in the field of arts.
Their plans include incorporating new formats, like apps and HTML.
Joaquín’s final remark addressed the specificity of current mediascape,
which is highly heterogenous and, as a result, any successful enterprise
must provide content in diverse formats so users can enjoy it on a
variety of devices.

You can find a PDF of his original presentation here: [Presentation
Jouquin
Gonzales](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S4_01_JouquinGonzales.pdf)

Check out visualMANIAC’s blog : http://visualmaniac.com/visualmag

Contact Teresa and Joaquín :joaquin@visualmaniac.comteresa@visualmaniac.com

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562226](imgs/477910696_640.jpg)
