---
title: Harold Konickx | It’s not a page; new familiar ways of book design
author: roserowson
date: 2014-11-30
...

# Harold Konickx | It’s not a page; new familiar ways of book design {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [roserowson](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/roserowson/ "Posts by roserowson"),
November 30, 2014 at 9:48 pm.

During his brief talk nearing the end of the afternoon’s presentations,
Harold Konickx spent fifteen minutes discussing the changing face of the
page in the wake of digital publishing. He began by quoting Marshall
McLuhan, noting that “an environment becomes fully visible only when it
has been superseded by a new environment; thus we are always one step
behind in our view of the world”. This quote was employed as a way of
asking the question, how do readers and designers of digital books
relate to the page now that they are not dealing with a page in itself?
As Konickx asked, evoking McLuhan once more, “Are we ready for a
different kind of page… or are we trapped in a rear-view mirror view of
our world?”

**Reader; Designer; Book**

As a means of grounding his research on digital publishing, Konickx
focusses on the relationship between reader, designer and book. His
first case study to demonstrate this was the work of Megan Hoogenboom,
and specifically her ePub version of the poem [“Boem Paukeslag” by Paul
van
Ostaijen](http://www.meganhoogenboom.nl/index.php/boeken/digitaal-boek/24-epub-boem-paukeslag).
Konickx noted that while this kind of poetry depends on specific
formatting, taking spacing and fonts into consideration, for example,
Hoogenboom successfully translated the poem into ePub format by
transcending the usual role of the page, reinventing the part it is
meant to play and “overcoming the so-called boundaries of ePub”.

Konickx argued that Hoogenboom touched on the core of what a book is
through this work; but what exactly is a book if it is not a collection
of physical pages? The traditional notion of the book is very much bound
by content as well as form. Surely drawing on Kittler’s work in
[*Software Studies: A
Lexicon*](http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/software-studies), Konickx
evoked the example of the codex, noting how the development of parchment
allowed the creation of the book as a whole, and on the part of the
reader allowing them to feel as if they were holding “the whole world”
in their hands. In particular here, Konickx cited Miriam Rasch as
stating that digital books do not allow one to really feel what point
they are at within a book: physical books, on the other hand, allow
substance and form to work together to create a pleasurable mental and
tactile experience.



![caption](imgs/15896641321_a4a911d2b5_o.jpg)
Harold Konickx takes us through Alberto Manguel



Konickx is well aware of the nostalgic qualities of his research. Just
as with McLuhan, he nodded to [Alberto
Manguel’s](http://www.alberto.manguel.com/) argument that new
technological developments make us more aware of old fashioned qualities
we would otherwise have overlooked. A possible analogy of this, Konickx
argued, is being currently demonstrated within the musical community
with the rise in use of vinyl records. While accepting the love of books
as objects is romantic, and books having desirably qualities in and of
themselves, the session was not about putting the physical book on a
pedestal.

**The Digital**



![caption](imgs/15898638565_6f3d80237f_o.jpg)
Skeuomorphism on iBooks



Considering the skeuomorphism present in Apple’s iBooks software,
Konickx lucidly brought us back to McLuhan’s horseless carriage
syndrome, wherein the first motor vehicles where designed to resemble
horse drawn carriages in order to acclimatise the general public to
their presence on the road. But despite the illusion of pages turning as
shown in this image, Konickx argues that ebooks do, in fact, promote a
far different experience than that of reading a printed book. Despite
identifying ebooks as being essentially networked, Konickx returned to
the description of physical books as a positive experience of allowing
readers to have the whole world in their hands; I suppose that in this
instance, the limits of a world – i.e., the end of the book – are more
appealing than a world that is seemingly endless.

Returning to Megan Hoogenboom, Konickx used her work as an example to
show that the potential success of the ebook as a medium lies in the
acceptance of its own specific capabilities. What makes a digital book
stand on its own? Konickx pointed us towards [*Between Page and Screen:
Remaking Literature through Cinema and
Cyberspace*](http://fordhampress.com/index.php/between-page-and-screen-paperback.html)
as an extensive collection of essays, published in 2012, as a means of
establishing a discourse on the subject.

**Intermediation**

Coming to the end of his talk, Konickx moved to N. Katherine Hayles’
essay “Intermediation”. Throughout her work, Hayles has been drawing
comparisons between humans and computers to make a claim on our
inter-relation. She argues that literature throughout the 20th century
is computational. Konickx believes that the reading of a physical book
lies in stark difference to the reading of a digital; Hayles would agree
with this, and propose that this difference lies in the constant flux of
words and images that change as a result of our needs. Moreover, Hayles
argues that “a computer can function as a partner in creating
intermediary dynamics in ways that a book cannot,” placing more agency
to a computer as opposed to its printed and bound counterpart. According
to Hayles, engagers with digital books are players rather than readers,
as they have more control over what they are consuming. Hayles’ primary
example of this is Judd Morrissey’s [The Jew’s
Daughter](http://thejewsdaughter.com/), a form of digital literature,
she argues, would be impossible when combined with the durability of
ink.

Konickx left us with this example, and by finally reminding us that a
digital page is not a page, at least not in the same way as a physical
book. These physical books have irreplaceable qualities, but digital
books have new qualities that have yet to be fully explored through
experimentation and the development of new ways of creation, and of
engagement.
