---
title: Elizabeth Castro: CatalanTalk – Publishing multilingual interviews, from Twitter to ebooks to paper
author: irina
date: 2014-05-27
...

# Elizabeth Castro: CatalanTalk – Publishing multilingual interviews, from Twitter to ebooks to paper {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [irina](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/irina/ "Posts by irina"),
May 27, 2014 at 10:20 am.

![caption](imgs/Liz-Castro.jpg)

[Elizabeth Castro](https://twitter.com/lizcastro) kicked off the second
session of the conference by introducing herself as a computer book
writer. [She is the author of several
guides](http://www.elizabethcastro.com/) on how to create webpages and
epubs by working with tools like HTML, XML, InDesign and CSS.

In this talk, however, Castro showed how she applies this know-how to a
topic close to her heart: the independence of Catalonia. She is an
active contributor to Catalan online news portal
[VilaWeb](http://www.vilaweb.cat/english) and has recently moved to
Barcelona. When she first started the collaboration there, she noticed
how hard it was to spread the word about Catalonia’s struggles
internationally. The reason was the use of one language (Catalan) and
only posting news on the website. That is when she decided to carry
interviews with Catalan activists, researchers, politicians, writers and
artists on Twitter, in multiple languages, using the social network as a
live chat. After this, she came up with the idea of publishing the
interviews as electronic collections.

The interviews take place in real time, Castro explained, and people can
follow and comment on them, therefore creating a new space for
discussions. Each interview has the hashtag \#CatalanTalk and another
one for the local language (for example, \#CatalanTalkEn). Each
interview is translated in multiple languages by a team of volunteers.
The interviews are further embedded on the Twitter stream on VilaWeb’s
website.

There are challenges to this method, Castro also pointed out. First, she
needs to decide the exact time to have the interview each week, so that
followers know when it takes place. This is particularly burdened by the
different times zones of interviewees. Another challenge is that both
her and the interviewee need to type extremely fast – the interviews
last maximum one hour, because that is how long they expect followers to
tap in.

The main benefit of this method is the global reach of her interviews,
facilitated by the use of hash tags, comments, re-tweets and
translations.

There are also limitations to Twitter interviews, she warned. For
example, interviewees need to have an account and to be familiar with
Twitter in the first place. Furthermore, they might often get very
heated on the topic, which makes the interview hard to moderate.
Finally, not everyone can follow the interviews on Twitter (either
because they do not have an account or simply because they read on other
formats). While Castro regularly publishes the interviews on VilaWeb,
she recently decided to turn them into e-publications too.

How does she do that? The flow of publishing starts with archiving all
the tweets via [Storify](https://storify.com/). Then, Castro explained,
she exports them from Storify to XML. At this point, there might be a
lot of irrelevant tweets in the data. In order to extract the clean
interview, she uses XSLT to filter the XML file by giving it certain
commands (such as to delete all re-tweets or comments and keep only the
original interview). After clearing it up, she imports the XML file in
InDesign, where the text loses all the unnecessary metadata and becomes
readable text. Finally, she proof reads and copy-edits the text, as
typos and grammar mistakes are common when writing so fast. She also
sometimes edits abbreviations and typos (these are inevitably used on
Twitter, given the 140 characters limit) but restrains from changing her
interviewees’ writing styles or tone of voice. After all these steps,
she exports the file to EPub, which can also be printed and distributed.

Reflecting on the idea of having liveTwitter interviews and then
transforming them into e-publications, Castro believes one can truly
take advantage of the ephemeral, but highly interactive and engaging
nature of Twitter conversations and transform them into concrete
literature by means of e-publishing.

You can find a PDF of her original presentation here: [Presentation
Elizabeth
Castro](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S2_01_ElizabethCastro.pdf)

*Photo credits: Martin Risseeuw*

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562278](imgs/477909420_640.jpg)
