---
title: Silvio Lorusso ‘The Post-Digital Publishing Archive: An Inventory of Speculative Strategies’
author: Katía Truijen
date: 2014-12-6
...

# Silvio Lorusso ‘The Post-Digital Publishing Archive: An Inventory of Speculative Strategies’ {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Katía
Truijen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/katiatruijen/ "Posts by Katía Truijen"),
December 6, 2014 at 10:07 pm.

[![15279147033\_9216c0be33\_z](imgs/15279147033_9216c0be33_z.jpg)]()

[Silvio Lorusso](http://silviolorusso.com/) is an artist and desiger and
PhD Candidate in Design Sciences at Iuav University of Venice. He
investigates experimental publishing informed by digital technology and
has created the [Post-Digital Publishing Archive](http://p-dpa.net/).
During the Digital Publishing Showcase, Lorusso presented an overview of
speculative strategies and best practices of experimental digital
publishing.

[![Schermafbeelding 2014-12-05 om
10.27.53](imgs/Schermafbeelding-2014-12-05-om-10.27.53.png)]()

The [Post-Digital Publishing Archive](http://p-dpa.net/) is a research
and curatorial platform aimed at systematically collecting, organizing
and keeping trace of experiences in the fields of art and design that
explore the relationships between publishing and digital technology.

Lorusso explains that experimental practices emerge in the fields of
critical and speculative design, critical making, e-literature, artists
books and digital humanities. The critical design project The [DRM
Chair](http://vimeo.com/60475086)by Les Sugus for example, has only a
limited number of use (8 times) before it self-destructs. The project
refers to digital rights management, a system that is often used for
digital books to prevent unlimited sharing. Projects like the DRM Chair
expose the inner workings of (digital) systems.

[![](imgs/419644379_640.jpg)](http://vimeo.com/60475086)

Lorusso explains that according to [Mike
Shatzkin](http://www.idealog.com/about-us/about-mike-shatzkin/), digital
publishing has becomes a *function* instead of an industry. Some artists
and designers play with this idea. James Bridle for example
automatically generated the publication [*My Life in
Tweets*](http://booktwo.org/notebook/vanity-press-plus-the-tweetbook/)that
simply contains all his tweets of two years. Another example is
[FOMO](http://www.spacecaviar.net/projects/fomo/) by Space Caviar, a
selfgenerated magazine that contains social media interactions based on
a hashtag.

Lorusso wonders how we would characterize digital publishing if we
understand it as merely a function. How can we  escape a generic service
model? And how to take advantage of the opportunities that digital
publishing allows for? ‘If digital publishing is indeed a function,
let’s actually *perform* this function’, he states.

Why not playing with the tools that we are already familiar with?
Lorusso argues that not many people are aware of the fact that Microsoft
Word is not so much a software product, but it can actually be
understood as a language. Microsoft Word 2008 even has an
‘AutoSummarize’ 10-sentence function that examines the document and
‘picks the sentences most relevant to the main theme’. Lorusso refers to
the [project of Jason
Huff](http://www.jason-huff.com/projects/autosummarize/), who has
summarized the 100 most downloaded free books including Metamorphosis
and the Illiad. It’s interesting to ask who would be the author of this
book. Is it Kafka? Microsoft Word? Or Jason Huff?



[![Just in Time, or A Short History of Production by Xavier
Antin](imgs/08.jpg)]()
Just in Time, or A Short History of Production by Xavier Antin



There are more artists that reflect on the tools that are used for
publishing. Xavier Antin for example has created [an
installation](http://www.xavierantin.fr/archive/Just-In-Time/) that
consists of four printers from different periods in time that all print
one colour. By letting the tools express themselves it shows that tools
are never neutral. They all bring their own constrains, systems and
aesthetics.

Lorusso argues that because of digital technologies and software, there
has been a paradigm shift in publishing from creating to curating.
Kenneth Goldsmith explains this process in his book [*Uncreative
Writing.*](http://www.amazon.com/Uncreative-Writing-Managing-Language-Digital/dp/0231149913)It
explores how techniques like word processing, databasing and intensive
programming have influenced the act of writing.

More and more artists and designers experiment with publishing through
collecting and filtering. Roger Ebert for example has created [The
Collected Wikipedia
Edits](http://www.quentonmiller.com/roger-ebert-the-collected-wikipedia-edits/)
by publishing all edits by Wikipedians on specific articles. A rather
hilarious example is [Working On My
Novel](http://novel.coryarcangel.com/)by Cory Arcangel, who has created
a book with tweets that include “working on my novel”. Interestingly
enough Penguin has actually published the book. According to Lorusso it
shows that these kind of strategies are becoming more and more
mainstream.

The issue with digital publishing is often that it requires a lot of
labour to do it well and to make it work for every single format. This
way compromises must be made in terms of functionality. The examples of
Lorusso show that many artists play with existing formats by taking
advantage of their specific features. By exposing these features through
art and design, we may create a better understanding of what digital
publishing will look like in the (near) future.

*More speculative strategies can be found in the [Post-Digital
Publishing Archive](http://p-dpa.net/).*

[![](imgs/499982828_640.jpg)](http://vimeo.com/114339867)
