---
title: Miriam Rasch – Hybrid Workflows for Hybrid Publishing
author: jakubdutka
date: 2014-05-28
...

# Miriam Rasch – Hybrid Workflows for Hybrid Publishing {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [jakubdutka](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/jakubdutka/ "Posts by jakubdutka"),
May 28, 2014 at 12:28 am.



[![Miriam Rasch](imgs/14057602360_c654d55103_z.jpg)]()
Miriam Rasch



Miriam Rasch, a co-editor (together with René König) of [INC Reader \#9,
Society of the Query: Reflections on Web
Search,](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/portal/publication/society-of-the-query-reader-reflections-on-web-search/)
presented the workflow she and her colleagues followed while working on
the Reader. The Institute of Network Cultures project group involved:
Joost Kircz, Silvio Lorusso, Michael Murtaugh, and Kimmy Spreeuwenberg. Miriam
described their creative process following the principles of hybrid
publishing – creating one publication for several different output
formats. The reasoning behind it was to move the INC publications beyond
the print format and facilitate the distribution on digital
devices.

Miriam went on to describe INC’s efforts to disseminate
their publications. All the publications are distributed under Creative
Commons license and the print copies can be ordered for free. INC uses a
number of platforms (for
instance [ISUU)](http://issuu.com/instituteofnetworkcultures) and file
formats to expedite the distribution of its publications. They also
introduced two innovative digital formats: iPad magazine and personal
EPUB. The iPad magazine, designed to target a broader audience, features
a selection of 10 articles from the Reader translated into Dutch, with
added pictures and video clips. Due to its multimedia nature its only
available on iPad. The personal EPUB is an interactive way of choosing
articles of one’s interest (up to 10) from the INC database and
compiling them into an e-book, in DIY fashion. Moreover, a variety of
additional materials are available online, the most notable example
being materials from a range of conferences organised by INC, like
[Society of the Query](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/query/), [Money
Lab](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/moneylab/) or [Unlike
Us](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/unlikeus/). The conference
materials, including pictures and video clips are available on
[Flickr](https://www.flickr.com/photos/networkcultures/sets/)and
[Vimeo](http://vimeo.com/networkcultures/videos). More information can
be found on [INC’s website.](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/portal/)

[![14240898741\_0dd918cefb\_z](imgs/14240898741_0dd918cefb_z.jpg)]()Society
of the Query reader was put together following a print
oriented workflow. The first step was the design of the PDF file,
followed by the print version and an online PDF version on Issuu. Due to
its format specificity, the EPUB file was created last, autonomously
from the previous three. Miriam explained how her team changed their
usual ‘print’ workflow to a hybrid workflow which is more sensitive to
the several possible outputs, print or digital, which makes the proces
of digital publishing easier and more efficient. In this proces the
contents of the book were compiled into a single Word document and then
formatted using Markdown syntax, which was then converted into HTML. The
use of Markdown coding allows for easy and non-invasive conversion
between different output formats.

You can find a PDF of her original presentation here: [Presentation
Miriam
Rasch](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S3_02_MiriamRasch.pdf)

Miriam writes books reviews and guest posts for different websites and
magazines. Look up her [personal blog](http://www.miriamrasch.nl/).

[![](imgs/477910524_640.jpg)](http://vimeo.com/96562332)
