---
title: John Haltiwanger: Free Your Objects (And Let The Subject Follow)
author: irina
date: 2014-06-10
...

# John Haltiwanger: Free Your Objects (And Let The Subject Follow) {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [irina](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/irina/ "Posts by irina"),
June 10, 2014 at 12:37 pm.

*A post by Mathijs Weijers*

John Haltiwanger was the third speaker of session 2, which focused on
publishing workflows, tools and platforms.

His talk aimed to give the audience a better understanding of the recent
work of [Gilbert
Simondon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gilbert_Simondon)![](imgs/favicon.ico)
on cybernetics theory. Simonodon’s work shines a new perspective on
[Norbert
Wiener’](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norbert_Wiener)![](imgs/favicon.ico)s
theory of cybernetics, originally published in 1948, but it is often
hard to grasp by readers. Hence, Haltiwanger wanted to offer the
audience a clear analysis of the essential terms of Simondon’s
vocabulary on cybernetics.

Haltiwanger warned that he is not an academic, and that he became
interested in the topic when doing his master’s thesis in New Media and
Digital Culture at University of Amsterdam: “I had to make a decision
about the format the thesis should be published in: PDF, HTML or .doc?”.
Choosing the right format seems to be very easy but actually can be
problematic, as each has its own specificity. PDF might have a clean
interface but it’s hard to archive and be read by machines – HTML
would do that job better. Word Documents are, in his opinion, standard
formats that are required in the academic environment but have little
benefits and reduced usability. There is furthermore the issue of
proprietary formats. While he used the open-source Libre software to
write his thesis, when exporting to PDF it crashed. These
inconsistencies are harmful as “knowledge is too important to be locked
in proprietary tools”. Thus, the thesis topic soon revolved around the
very format that academic publications can take, Haltiwanger joked. Yet,
this is why he believes that understanding the vocabulary for discussing
the cybernetics theory of Simondon is important, as users are forced to
simplify or even weaken the content of what they are working on in order
to get a desired format. Whilst there are so many format options,
Haltiwanger argued, “we are constrained by liberty”.

[![John Haltiwinger photo](imgs/John-Haltiwinger-photo.jpg)]()



Haltiwanger explained Simondon’s cybernetics theory by a couple of
terms. The first one is *medium specificity.* Its official definition
is: “1. the fact, condition, or quality of being specific. 2 the quality
of being specific to a particular organism”. In the context of
publishing, a book and a Kindle have different specificities: the Kindle
is built with cheap labour and needs a charger, the book needs trees as
primary material and a shelf to be placed on. Knowing this, how should
an academic paper look like? PDF, HTML or Word?

The next term is *metastability.* To explain this definition,
Haltiwanger used a picture of an iceberg. An iceberg affects its
environment but the environment also shapes the iceberg – it’s a dynamic
progress. This metastability is taking place in the digital age as well.
There are components that influence each other, hence digital objects
will be different tomorrow.

The third term is t*ransduction*, defined by Simodon as follows:

> “An operation–physical, biological, mental, social–by which an
> activity propagates itself from one element to the next, within a
> given domain, and founds this propagation on a structuration of the
> domain that is realized from place to place: each area of the
> constituted structure serves as the principle and the model for the
> next area, as a primer for its constitution, to the extent that the
> modification expands progresively at the same time as the structuring
> operation. (Simondon 2009: 11).”

The term is hard to work with, and Haltiwanger proposes a replacement:
*calcification* . This is easier explained as “what has come before you
an what you choose to put back into it is going to define the next layer
of bone that the world is growing”). In other words, e-publishing is
constantly reshaped by the tools and practices we choose to employ now.

Finally, there is a matter of *reciprocity:* helping the computer with
the right input so that it delivers the desire output. HTML is,
according to Haltiwanger, the best suited format for the future of
e-publishing.

Haltiwanger believes that tools in general evolve reciprocally with
their use, as do the users of those tools. What we can do and what we
wish we could do are enabled (or limited) not only by the tools we have
access to but also by the larger socio-economic conditions that
determine these tools and their modes of production and operation. Tools
actively participate in shaping our identity as producers, makers, and
appreciators. Through the case study of a multi-output typesetting
workflow that uses only Libre software, his talk explored a vocabulary
to think differently about how we work with text today, one of that
focuses on qualities of re-composition and the dynamics of a different
type of ownership.

The essential questions here, as Haltiwanger proposed in the end, are
not only what tools and what experience to build but also what is the
underlying skeleton of our endeavors.

You can find a PDF of his original presentation here: [Presentation John
Haltiwanger](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S2_04_JohnHaltiwanger.pdf)

 

[![](imgs/477910239_640.jpg)](http://vimeo.com/96562329)
