---
title: Florian Cramer on “The Art of Hybrid Publishing”
author: margreet riphagen
date: 2014-10-01
...

# Florian Cramer on “The Art of Hybrid Publishing” {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [margreet
riphagen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/arjen/ "Posts by margreet riphagen"),
October 1, 2014 at 5:11 pm.





#  {.post-title}



Source: [Hybrid Publishing
Lab](http://hybridpublishing.org/2014/09/florian-cramer-on-the-art-of-hybrid-publishing/)













[Julia
Rehfeldt](http://hybridpublishing.org/author/juliarehfeldt/ "Julia Rehfeldt") — 
September 29, 2014 — [Leave a
comment](http://hybridpublishing.org/2014/09/florian-cramer-on-the-art-of-hybrid-publishing/#respond "Comment on Florian Cramer on “The Art of Hybrid Publishing”")









![](imgs/fCramer-e1412002165632.jpg)Florian Cramer is an applied
research professor and director of Creating 010, the research centre
affiliated to Willem de Kooning Academy and Piet Zwart Institute at the
Rotterdam University of Applied Sciences in the Netherlands. He also
works for WORM, a Rotterdam-based venue for DIY avant-garde culture.

**Hybrid Publishing Lab**: What recent changes do you see within the
intersection of DIY culture and hybrid publishing?

**Florian Cramer**: My colleagues Alessandro Ludovico and Silvio Lorusso
would be the better people to ask because they’re much more in touch
with contemporary practices and projects in this particular area. What I
generally observe is that hardcore DIY publishers go back to print,
particularly DIY printmaking including stencil presses, Risographs and
silk screening. Experimental hybrid digital/analog publishing seems to
be a domain mostly of graphic designers – which no longer means DIY in
the narrow sense of the word.

**HPL**: You developed a toolkit for publishers, can you briefly explain
the focus of this project to our readers?



**Cramer: **It’s not only for publishers, but also for designers,
authors and editors. The focus is (a) on e-books and e-book technology,
(b) on publishing in the arts, which encompasses everything from theory
books to artists’ experimental publications but in most cases means
visually oriented publishing. We found that in the field of the arts,
there is hardly any existing e-publishing know-how. Yet publishers feel
a great urgency to switch from pure paper publishing to hybrid paper and
electronic publishing for a whole number of reasons: costs, distribution
and outreach, but also new opportunities provided by the electronic
publishing; even if they just boil down to a museum offering, instead of
one heavy exhibition catalogue, customized e-books with a number of
works selected by the individual buyer, or to a publisher selling single
poems instead of a poetry volume.

Our toolkit consists of a handbook that gives everyone, regardless their
level of previous knowledge, a step-by-step technical and editorial
introduction into publishing electronic books. It is meant for small
publishers who cannot simply outsource such work to external agencies
and focuses on new editorial workflows that make it easier to
simultaneously publish in different media (such as paper book, e-book,
web site). The handbook covers different typical publication scenarios.
Next to this handbook, our Toolkit includes a number of self-written
software utilities. Very likely, it will also provide a user-friendly
interface for command-line Open Source software that we recommend as a
hybrid publishing document processing tool.

The development of this toolkit partly needs to be understood from a
Dutch cultural context where Gert Lovink and me work as applied research
professors in the system of higher polytechnic education and therefore
do hands-on R&D in collaboration with publishers and designers. There is
a major crisis of arts publishers in the Netherlands because most of
them depended (directly or indirectly) on public arts funding; funding
that has recently been slashed by the government. This urges everyone to
radically rethink the way they work. Obviously, electronic publishing is
not a panacea. Hybrid publishing can even make things more complicated
and, in the worst case, more expensive. So we’re looking for pragmatic,
working solutions – not snazzy design show-off work that may create
wow-effects but will not be a workable model for real life, in an area
of publishing where books rarely have editions of more than a few
hundred or few thousand. Focus on showcase projects has been the
achilles heel of all electronic and multimedia publishing efforts ever
since the CD-ROM in the 1990s.

We eventually want to take our project beyond the Dutch context and
continue our critical R&D in a wider European context. But the toolkit
will be published in English and, by the way of eating our own dog food,
made available in different digital and analog formats.

**HPL**: What was your experience when developing it?

**Cramer: **We greatly underestimated how little publishers are familiar
with computer technology outside the established Microsoft/Adobe
toolchain, and what a culture shock it was for them to be confronted
with new workflows that have their origin in Open Source, scientific
publishing and the World Wide Web (such as, for example, a simplified
markup language like Markdown). Many designers, publishers and editors
hope that hybrid publishing is an issue that could simply be resolved
with an additional export button in InDesign, but this is and will never
be the case. We also saw that other comparable projects, often initiated
by artists, designers or media researchers, started with bold promises
but failed to deliver because they had either underestimated the
complexity of the matter, or constrained themselves to solutions that
only work on one particular technological platform (such as Apples
iPad).

**HPL**: Which book will you always have as an analogue copy in your
bookshelf?

**Cramer: **Obviously, George Maciunas’ “Flux Paper Events” (published
by Edition Hundertmark in 1976). And, by, implication, all artists’
books, bookworks, design books and visual books for which the medium of
paper and the form of the bound codex is indispensable. – On the other
hand, I wouldn’t mind getting rid of thousands of conventional paperback
and hardcover text books in my home library and replace them with
electronic books, for the pragmatic sake of gaining space, and always
having my library with me as searchable files on one USB stick; despite
the obvious usability and durability advantages of paper books.

As a matter of fact, the question of analog vs. digital publishing is
not one of mutual excluding alternatives; it’s not about “either/or” (as
most of the publishing industry still believes) but about “and-and”.
This is why our toolkit isn’t called “electronic publishing toolkit” but
“hybrid publishing toolkit”. For the same reasons, I’m convinced that
we’re living in post-digital times where analog and digital coexist, and
get hybridized. Just like true music lovers own their music both in
digital and analog form, on vinyl \*and\* as mp3 files, I would advise
publishers to target book lovers who want their reading material on
paper \*and\* as an epub or PDF file. This could, btw., be good
business, too.

Our upcoming Conference on Publishing between Open Access, Piracy and
Public Spheres is up for [registration
now](http://www.postdigitalscholar.org/). You can read all
Interviews [here](http://hybridpublishing.org/tags/pdc14intro/).

Read tomorrow the introduction interview with Gary Hall, co-founder of
the open access journal Culture Machine, and co-founder of Open
Humanities Press.


