---
title: Towards a hybrid workflow: editor, designer and developer UNITE!
author: Becky Cachia
date: 2014-11-30
...

# Towards a hybrid workflow: editor, designer and developer UNITE! {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Becky
Cachia](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/beckycachia/ "Posts by Becky Cachia"),
November 30, 2014 at 5:48 pm.

In the final showcase of the Digital
Publishing Toolkit event in November 2014, Michael Murtaugh presented on
behalf of the rest of the **Institute of Network Cultures subgroup** –
that includes Joost Kircz, Silvio Lorusso, Miriam Rasch and Kimmy
Spreeuwenberg – to answer the question:

***How can small edition, low budget publishing houses edit, design, and
develop a new, hybrid workflow for editing, designing and developing?***

The INC subgroup has developed and optimised a workflow for print and
digital publications to make the process of publishing on different
platforms and in different formats easier and more efficient. Murtaugh
gave a concise overview of their **“hybrid workflow”** by firstly
explaining what is meant by “hybridity”. Within the publishing process,
hybridity refers to a multitude of different things, including different
screen sizes and technologies as well as print vs. digital.

Murtaugh stressed that **“hybridity” also denotes the diverse dynamics
of different reading practices.** People read in an increasing variety
of ways and therefore associate different devices with distinct reading
situations. For example, along with people believing that the physical
book can never be replaced, there are those that feel that reading off a
phone is ideal in some situations whereas using an e-reader or a tablet
is appropriate in other contexts. Therefore, it is interesting to think
of e-readers not only in relation to the conventional idea of “a book”
but also in relation to other electronic devices.

The dynamics of different reading practices and print or digital devices
therefore **demands hybridity in the practices of publishing** and the
goal of the INC subgroup was **to connect the existing publishing
practices and to suggest new ways of working.** Rather than regarding
roles in isolation, e.g. viewing the author, editor, designer and
developer as separate entities, the aim was to build bridges and connect
the different roles through the tools being used and through a feedback
system of “talking back to each other”. In this way, could new ouptuts
then influence and be fed back into, for example, new ways of writing?

Through their own workflow for this project, the INC subgroup organised
monthly work sessions in order to create situations where team members
could look over each other’s shoulders to fully understand what each
person was doing and how they were doing it. The group could experience
first hand the benefits and challenges of fine-tuning a hybrid workflow,
and could create a system that addresses the challenges of a dynamic
publishing process through being both structured and yet flexible.

## The creation of “How-to & Style Guides”:

![caption](imgs/15898637095_6696785138_z.jpg)

**[How-to](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/10/21/hybrid-workflow-how-to-making-automated-workflows-part-1/)**
and **[Style
Guides](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/10/21/style-guide-for-hybrid-publishing/),**
and running workshops in which the roles of editors, designers and
developers overlap, the digital publication is not simply added onto the
end of the existing print-centred publishing workflow, but can already
inform each step of the process. The idea of constant feedback and
output influencing each step of the process breaks down the linearity of
the workflow and creates single source, multi-format publishing. By
bridging practices, each member of the workflow can work using the same
standard set of style features or even avoiding certain formatting
features that would make the process easier in the long run.

## Using a set of hybrid tools:

![caption](imgs/15896641151_4aa3c985f7_z.jpg)

[a set of tools was put
together](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/10/21/hybrid-workflow-how-to-making-automated-workflows-part-2/)
(namely, Markdown, Git, Pandoc and Make). These are tools that come from
a long history of programming practices and are therefore very robust.
In addition, because lots of different programmers work with them, they
are very flexible. For example, the choice to use Markdown means that
the text is reduced to the very core of what it is. There are no
stylistic enhancements or automatic rendering of the text (as is common
in word processing, for instance). The text is a ‘clean’ source that can
then be interpreted by the designer for the medium specific elements of,
for example, different devices for reading.

## Looking ahead

Murtaugh ended the showcase by looking ahead to where the development of
a hybrid workflow and EPUBs can be taken.

– An EPUB player is currently in development, which is a way to look at
an EPUB online in a browser without having to generate a different html
version. Through the player, an EPUB can be embedded into a website and
pages can also be bookmarked and then exported as a separate EPUB.
Murtaugh referred to this as being **“kind of like a photocopier for the
book”**, whereby the EPUB you export is not a perfect publication, but
it is still very useful for yourself (just like the pages of a book you
photocopy).

– Secondly, Murtaugh gave a brief overview of having a hybrid editor,
which is an attempt to make something that is in between the different
kinds of working/publishing interfaces and tools we normally see. It is
an integrated tool whose different parts come from somewhere else (e.g.
from other open source tools), but they are all brought into the same
interface. Murtaugh, ended the showcase by claiming that **it is
exciting to think of interfaces that can offer this kind of hybridity
and functionalities.**
