---
title: Arjen de Jong: Sketching skills
author: irina
date: 2014-05-27
...

# Arjen de Jong: Sketching skills {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [irina](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/irina/ "Posts by irina"),
May 27, 2014 at 3:31 pm.

De Jong is a visual designer for design agency
[Essense](http://essense.eu/about/) and a member of [BIS
Publishers](http://www.bispublishers.nl/), both located in Amsterdam. He
attended the conference “Off the Press: Electronic Publishing in the
Arts” as a representative of the latter and shared the production
process of two of their recent e-publications.

[![Arjen de Jong](imgs/Arjen-de-Jong.jpg)]()

The first case study he presented was the translation of the best seller
book titled “[Sketching: The
basics](http://www.amazon.com/Sketching-The-Basics-2nd-printing/dp/9063692536)”
by Roselien Steur an Koos Eissen into an e-publication (app) that design
students and creative professionals would find easier to learn from. The
desired output was for the e-publication to be highly interactive and
visual while allowing the readers to choose between different narratives
(linear reading versus fragmented, personalized reading). The idea was
to focus on the book’s purpose – to teach “the basics” of sketching.
With the app (soon to be launched), design students can choose if they
want a step-by-step teaching process or dive directly into specific
skills. They can also choose to read on theory or practice bits, or jump
to industry experts’ highlights.

This is how the demo of the app looks like:

[![Arjen de Jong demo 0](imgs/Arjen-de-Jong-demo-0.png)]() ![Arjen de
Jong demo](imgs/Arjen-de-Jong-demo.png)

 

 

 

 

 

The other case study was translating the book “[Think like a lawyer,
don’t act like
one](http://www.amazon.com/Think-Like-Lawyer-Dont-Act/dp/9063693079)” by
Aernoud Bourdrez into an electronic publication (EPUB3). In this case,
they opted for a neat, flat design in order to stay as close as possible
to the printed version. In either cases, BIS Publishers followed the
same workflow, which De Jong shared with the audience.

He first stressed out that one of the most important steps in the
workflow is knowing what you’re looking for in the upcoming product.
This means researching your target audience: who are they? What devices
do they use? How do they engage with reading and exploring? What is the
best format for them? Are they permanently online? etc. These insights
further dictate what type of content is more suitable (flat text or rich
media? Linear or fragmented narratives?).

Then, the authors, designers and publishers (more often than not, one
can play all three roles) choose the design and publishing tools to work
with. They can opt for either open tools (a wide range of developer
tools, [Baker Framework](http://www.bakerframework.com/),
[Sourcefabric](http://www.sourcefabric.org/)) or proprietary tools
([InDesign](http://www.adobe.com/products/indesign.html), [iBooks
Author](http://www.apple.com/ibooks-author/),
[LayerGloss](https://www.layergloss.com/),
[PressMatrix](http://www.pressmatrix.de/)).

Second, a decision on format is required: would ePub, iBook, Mobipocket
or a stand-alone app better suit the purpose? De Jong argues in favor of
open, flexible and sustainable formats; in his experience CSS, EPUB,
Hybrid and the likes work best.

The third step is picking a distributor: iTunes, App Store, Newsstand,
Google Play, Amazon App Market or indirect distribution. When choosing a
distributor, De Jong warns about the terms and conditions that apply
with proprietary distributors like Google, Amazon or iTunes, as they
often require the right to exclusive distribution. Once the
distributor(s) is chosen, publishers opt for the platform, such as IOS,
Android or Kindle.

Finally, the product is made available on a device: iPad, Android Tablet
or Kindle.

At BIS Publishers, De Jong works mostly with rich content (interactive,
audio, video, fragmented narratives) and thus prefers tablets and apps.
His checklist contains full color screen, high resolution, sound, and
internet connection. There are further technical aspects to be
considered on the long run, like the fact that updating an app is easier
and cheaper than buying a new e-reader. Different desired outcomes
dictate the use of different tools and platforms.

You can find a PDF of his original presentation here: [Presentation
Arjen de
Jong](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S3_05_ArjendeJong.pdf)

[![](imgs/477910652_640.jpg)](http://vimeo.com/96562364)
