---
title: Alessandro Ludovico – Networks as agents in the clash between personal and industrial post-digital print
author: jakubdutka
date: 2014-05-28
...

# Alessandro Ludovico – Networks as agents in the clash between personal and industrial post-digital print {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [jakubdutka](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/jakubdutka/ "Posts by jakubdutka"),
May 28, 2014 at 11:36 am.



![](imgs/14241082322_e72754dc53_z.jpg)
Alessandro Ludovico during his talk on day 1 of Off the Press 2014



Alessandro Ludovico, the author of *[Post-Digital Print, The Mutation Of
Publishing Since 1894](http://monoskop.org/log/?p=4165), *is an Italian
media critic and editor in chief of *Neural* magazine
(<http://neural.it/>) since 1993, for which he received an honorary
mention of the Prix [Ars
Electronica](http://monoskop.org/Ars_Electronica) 2004. He has published
and edited several books, and has lectured worldwide. He’s one of the
founders of [Mag.Net](http://postdigitalprint.org/)(Electronic Cultural
Publishers organization). He has been guest researcher at the Willem De
Kooning Academy in Rotterdam and he teaches at the Academy of Art in
Carrara. He is one of the authors of the *[Hacking Monopolism trilogy of
artworks](http://www.face-to-facebook.net/hacking-monopolism-trilogy.php)
([Google WIll Eat Itself](http://www.gwei.org/index.php), [Amazon
Noir](http://www.amazon-noir.com/thestory.html), [Face to
Facebook](http://www.face-to-facebook.net/index.php))*. He is currently
a PhD scholar at Anglia Ruskin University in Cambridge (UK).

Alessandro begun his lecture by addressing the changing mediascape,
shaped by two opposing forces: on one side the underground, personal
agendas and, on the other side, the corporate interests of Google and
the like. The post-digital print era is witnessing the booming in
net-content or IT-processes based artist’s books (with a whole taxonomy
of techniques and approaches), and the efforts in collective scanning of
underground culture in print, shared in proper digital repositories, is
revamping the production and rediscovering of critical content in a
classic form. On the other side, the unveiling of Google’s major plan
with the industrial scanning, the rising of the un-sustainability of
newspapers’ business model, the growing role of software in literary and
journalistic production, and the constant fine-tuning of commercial
e-publications’ rules.



![](imgs/Peter_Millson_Weymouth_lo.jpg)
Paul Soulellis



Alessandro went on to describe the taxonomy of publications scraping the
information from the internet. As a prime example, he introduced a New
York-based artist and creative director, Paul Soulellis, the founder
of [Library of the Printed
Web](http://libraryoftheprintedweb.tumblr.com/), a curatorial
project organized around artists who use screen capture, image grab,
site scrape and search query to develop printed matter from content
found on the web. Soulellis has tried to define this common strategy as
a sequence of “search, compile, publish.” Due to the coupling of free
content available on the internet in ‘big data’ proportions with the
inexpensive Print-on-Demand platforms, a new type of artists’ books has
emerged – one that ‘scrapes’ or ‘harvests’ content from the Internet and
re-work it into book format. Ludovico, after Soulellis, attempted to
compile a draft taxonomy through three categories:

-   **Grabbing (and scraping)**: artists who perform web searches query
    and grab (with intent) the results. They are interested in how the
    search engine articulates the idea. An example of that approach is
    *56 Broken Kindle Screens* – by Silvio Lorusso and Sebastian Schmieg
    (2012)

-   **Hunting**: The hunter takes a highly specific screen capture that
    functions as evidence to support an idea. They reject almost all of
    what they find because they’re looking for the exception. See [*A
    Series of Unfortunate
    Events*](http://photomichaelwolf.com/#book-asoue)(2010) by Michael
    Wolf – a compilation of [weird or bizarre situations that had been
    captured by Google’s Street View
    cameras.](https://www.lensculture.com/articles/michael-wolf-a-series-of-unfortunate-events)
-   **Performing**: Those are artists making work that involves the
    acting out of a procedure, in a narrative fashion, in a kind of
    performance between web and print. A performance with data, or how
    he put it: publishing performing the Internet. An example here is
    the *[American Psycho](http://traumawien.at/prints/american-psycho)* published by TRAUMAWIEN.

All the approaches presented above enable for the
‘[transduction](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transduction_%28genetics%29)’
between the internet and the print  book, namely they take a sequential,
or reductive part of the web and mould it into traditional publishing
guidelines. It is often the case that this practice is undertaken to
compansate for the imbalance between the colossal amount of information
available instantly on the internet and the limited human capacity to
process this information comprehensively.

The process of digitising everything is two-fold: it comprises of
creating natively digital content and digitising analogue cultural
objects through scanning. This **dematerialisation**, to quote Jacques
Derrida, is “a very deceptive word meaning that in truth they are moving
from one kind of matter to[*La Carte Ou Le
Territoire*](http://bcc.stdin.fr/LaCarteOuLeTerritoire/) (‘The Map or
the Territory’), which exploits Google Book searches to find identical
phrases across texts, revealing the ‘plagiarised’ nature of all writing.

Google’s efforts to digitise all human knowledge through the Google
Books project are widely discussed in academia and otherwise. Initially
advertised as a “dream of a universal library”, Google Books has been
interpreted and unveiled for its own final goal, which is creating
artificial intelligence. *Google and the World Brain* (2013), through
interviews with people directly involved, investigates the whole scope
of the project.

As opposed to the monopolistic inclinations of Google, Ludovico
introduced individuals and groups which strive to digitise culture in
order to facilitate the spread of knowledge, free of charge. To further
illustrate his point, Ludovico used three examples from Italian hacker
community :

![](imgs/14056684059_04960903f0_z.jpg)

1.  The Grafton 9 collective in Bologna which is scanning the political
    cyberpunk culture of
2.   ‘Archivio il Sessantotto’ (Archive of 1968) in Florence – a huge
    archive of political magazines, poster and leaflets about left
    activism.
3.   ‘Germinal’ archive in Carrara, which is also the historical archive
    of one of the biggest national anarchic communities, which has
    already started to scan their unique collection of

Drawing from Jeffrey Schnapp, Alessandro affirmed:

> “the book is a construct in constant evolution: a construct that
> routinely and dynamically interacts with a shifting array of other
> media types. In other words, the book is a technology.”

The statement above is embodied by the post-digital print, which reacted
to and reflected on the advent and subsequent ubiquity of digitised
texts. In order to survive to the online competion even newspapers since
a decade have included more ‘data’ in their own visual structure than
they ever did, in the form of big figure or sophisticated infographics.
Examples go further, to name only a few: books by Marshall McLuhan,
Jerome Agel and Quentin Fiore. The main question, then, is whether the
internet is a new medium, or just an accumulation of all the ‘old’
media? Photographs, texts, video clips, all predate the internet. If not
a ‘real’ medium, is the internet an agent, inducing radical changes in
other historical media, but leaving their inner core intact?

You can find a PDF of his original presentation here: [Presentation
Alessandro
Ludovico](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S1_02_Alessandro-Ludovico.pdf)

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96574475](imgs/477909957_640.jpg)
