---
title: A wrap up of the Digital Publishing Toolkit – Florian Cramer and Geert Lovink
author: Katía Truijen
date: 2014-12-07
...

# A wrap up of the Digital Publishing Toolkit – Florian Cramer and Geert Lovink {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Katía
Truijen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/katiatruijen/ "Posts by Katía Truijen"),
December 7, 2014 at 3:33 pm.

![](imgs/15276371604_5a8777d6b8_z.jpg)

![](imgs/15872825926_679111649e_z.jpg)

Geert Lovink and Florian Cramer conclude the afternoon by looking back
on two years of researching digital publishing; a succesful
collaboration between designers, schools, researchers and publishers.
Which lessons can we take from the research?

> *1. Digital publishing is still in a phase of transition*

When one compares reading and publishing to other media that have been
digitized over the past decades, one will see that publishing has
followed a different path. Indeed the field is changing, partly even in
a disruptive way, but it has not changed like the music industry,
newspaper industry or online video where one can see a consolidation of
business models.

In general, the publishing industry is still somewhat conservative
compared to other industries like those of magazines and journals. In
these fields there is a lot of experimentation and the Netherlands can
even be considered to be a pioneer with projects and business models
like [Blendle](https://blendle.nl/) and [de
Correspondent](https://decorrespondent.nl/). In other countries one can
already find some examples of distribution platforms for small
publishers, like [Minimore.de](https://minimore.de/) in Germany.

The fact that digital publishing is still in a transitional phase, is at
the same time very interesting. We may say that we are in the ‘Napster
moment’ in the printing industry. Geert Lovink states that when you
compare it to the rise of the Internet, it feels very much like 1995.
The systems are not yet working, but there is a lot of experiment and
research into different standards and platforms.

> *2. The electronic medium is often still (used as) a poor medium.*

Maybe digital publishing will remain in transition for the next couple
of years. Although there are no ‘solutions’ for the industry yet, a lot
has been achieved in the last two years. Effective working approaches
have been developed that work well in this transition phase. As an
overall conclusion one can state that much of these working methods
actually defy the expectations of what is *paper* and what is
*electronic*. The findings often have been counter-intuitive. For
example, the main expectations with electronic media is that they allow
for *rich* media, but there is still not much experimentation in this
field. Video is not often integrated into books to enrich the reading
experience. Why are multimedia books still rarely made?

Universities, art academies and applied universities still don’t combine
their expertise so much. In the field of filmstudies there are still
*books* on films instead of multimedia books. Another barrier is that
multimedia books would easily become multigigabyte files. Moreover, it
is very hard to get all the rights from film studios to include their
movies. But some of the obstacles also bring new opportunities. For
example, digital publishing allows for the creation of very small
formats that would never be printed as a book, like a
one-poem-publication.

> *3. The publishing triangle has become a square*

In the triangle of authors, designers and publishers, there is now
another role to take into account. In digital publishing, the role of
the programmer has become very important. This means that people have to
collaborate in new and different ways. All traditional roles have to be
redefined to a certain extent.

> *4. We need more research on business models*

The project of the Digital Publishing Toolkit mainly focused on design
and production questions in collaboration with publishers. More research
has to be done on distribution and business models. These issues are
highly important for authors and publishers.

> *5. Sometimes we need to temper our (magic) expectations*

In the Netherlands there is an urgency to develop new formats for 
journals, especially because there have been serious budget cuts in this
field. Very often there is a magic expectation that digitization will
solve all problems. Indeed, more readers can be reached with digital
publishing, but the idea that it is cheaper than a printed version is a
myth. Often it is very hard to make money with digital content. A
compromise to simply export a print version into an epub often doesn’t
work at all. Different media ask for different workflows and specific
approaches.

> *6. Digital publishing has physical impact*

The two main places for books – the library and the bookshop – changed
dramatically with the rise of digital publishing. It has an enormous
impact on these environments, that are forced to reinvent themselves. It
would be good to extend the research on digital publishing and take the
wider urban context into account. The transformation of the bookshop and
the library have a direct link to the developments of e-books. What
would be the future of the bookstore and the library?

Libraries may be redefined as centers for digital literacy. After all,
there is a lot of expertise to be found in these environments. Another
interesting development to research is social reading. What tools can we
use in classes to combine deep reading of a text with discussion?

> *7. We need to develop alternatives*

The dystopian version of the future electronic bookmarket would be an
iTunes or NetFlix model. In the future there may be big commercial
providers that will offer full education packages that give access to
all books and publications. If schools subscribe to these kinds of
licences, libraries will be shut down. We should be aware of this kind
of neoliberal optimization of educational resources. If we don’t develop
alternatives, it may be too late.
