# Colophon

### Digital Publishing Toolkit: The Blog Posts
**Authors:** DPT Collective and guest bloggers<br/> 
**EPUB design:** André Castro<br/> 
**Cover design:** Medamo<br/> 
**Publisher:** Institute of Network Cultures, Amsterdam<br/> 

 
 
**The EPUB edition of this publication is freely downloadable from:** [http://networkcultures.org/publications/](http://networkcultures.org/publications/) 
 
 
**Contact:**<br/> 
Institute of Network Cultures<br/> 
Hogeschool van Amsterdam<br/> 
Rhijnspoorplein 1<br/> 
1091 GC Amsterdam<br/> 
The Netherlands<br/> 
[http://www.networkcultures.org](http://www.networkcultures.org)<br/> 
books@networkcultures.org<br/> 
t: +31 (0)20 595 18 65 
 
 
This publication is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial ShareAlike 4.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0). To view a copy of this license, visit [http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/). 
 
 
Amsterdam, February 2015


<!-- LOGOS ??? -->
[![Hogeschool van Amsterdam](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_HvA.png)](http://hva.nl) 
[![Medamo](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_medamo.png)](http://www.medamo.nl/) 
[![creating010](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_Creating010.png)](http://creating010.hr.nl) 
[![Valiz](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_valiz.png)](http://www.valiz.nl/) 
[![Create-IT Applied Research](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_Create-it.png)](http://www.hva.nl/create-it) 
[![Silvio Lorusso](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_SilvioLorusso.png)](http://silviolorusso.com/) 
[![Meeusontwerpt](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_Meeusontwerpt.png)](http://www.meeusontwerpt.nl/) 
[![Hogeschool Rotterdam](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_HRO.png)](http://www.hogeschoolrotterdam.nl/) 
[![Institute of Network Cultures](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_INC.png)](http://networkcultures.org) 
[![Restruct](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_Restruct.png)](https://restruct.nl/) 
[![BISPublishers](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_Bis.png)](http://www.bispublishers.nl/) 
[![nai010](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_nai.png)](http://www.nai010.com/) 
[![Essense](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_essense.png)](http://essense.eu/) 
[![PUNTPIXEL](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_puntpixel.png)](http://puntpixel.nl/) 
[![Regieorgaan Praktijkgericht Onderzoek SIA](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_SIA.png)](http://www.regieorgaan-sia.nl/) 
[![Mr. Sauli](imgs/logos_partners/logo_partner_MrSauli.png)](http://mrsauli.nl/) 

# Introduction

What this book is about.



# A leap into the future of (digital) reading {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [haroldkonickx](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/haroldkonickx/ "Posts by haroldkonickx"),
January 27, 2015 at 2:09 pm.

On the past event [Showcases Digital Publishing
Toolkit](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/event-showcases-dpt/) I
read the following text:

The Canadian mediatheorist Marshall McLuhan said in his famous [Playboy
interview](http://www.nextnature.net/2009/12/the-playboy-interview-marshall-mcluhan/) in
1969[:](http://www.nextnature.net/2009/12/the-playboy-interview-marshall-mcluhan/) ‘Most
people, as I indicated, still cling to what I call the rearview-mirror
view of their world. By this I mean to say that because of the
invisibility of any environment during the period of its innovation, man
is only consciously aware of the environment that has preceded it; in
other words, an environment becomes fully visible only when it has been
superseded by a new environment; thus we are always one step behind in
our view of the world.’

The next ten to twelves minutes I’d like to talk about the way readers
and designers (who are also readers) relate to books, now that books are
becoming digital (a lot of them not all them). As you can see in the
title of my talk the page is my point of convergence. The main question
is: are we ready for a different kind of page or it is impossible to see
it. As McLuhan predicted. Are we indeed trapped in a rearview-mirror
view of our world?

My name is Harold Konickx and I work as a researcher and teacher at a
school for interactive media, [Communication and Multimedia
Design](http://www.cmd-amsterdam.nl/), which is part of the Hogeschool
van Amsterdam. My talk is not free of some nostalgia, a bit of
frustration, but will be mainly good spirited and hopeful.

The KickOff for my research on the relation reader/designer/book, about
a year ago, was the work of Willem de Kooning graduate [Megan
Hoogenboom](http://www.meganhoogenboom.nl). She is a graphic designer
who specializes in Epub design. Hoogenboom made a transformation of Paul
van Ostayens Boem Paukeslag for epub. Working with this kind of poetry
in epub seems like an impossible task as is relies on ‘witruimte’,
visuality en different fonts. What you see here is not easy to transfer
to epub so Hoogenboom had to read the poem carefully and interprete it.
In doing so she invented a book that is ‘digitally born’; she uses epub
to reinvent the original page and she didn’t limit herself but overcame
the so called boundaries of epub. If you would like to hear more of
Hoogenboom and her ideas on digital publishing you can find an interview
with her right [here](http://vimeo.com/87566827).

To me she touched on the true core of the ebook. What is that core if a
book is not a collection of physical pages – the page as you know it –
anymore but an epub which is actually html which is the DNA of the World
Wide Web. I decided to interview experts and professionals in the the
field of digital media: (interaction)designers, publishers, developers
and even a writer of modern fiction. I asked them about the future of
the book, about ‘a spotify for books’ (or should I say ‘Blendle’) and I
tried to fish their idea out of them what will happen to the page as we
know it. Just like a did with Hoogenboom. Some of these interviews are
on video and are also to be found on the [vimeopage of the Institute of
Networkcultures](http://vimeo.com/networkcultures). I’ve picked some
interesting quotes for my talk.

She or he who wants to make a leap into the future of the (e-)book needs
to look at the past of the book. Doing so I discovered how strongly
intertwined form and the content of the traditional book are. In his *A
history of reading*, first published in 1996, Alberto Manguel explains
that the origins of the book as we know it lie in the 4^th^ AC with the
invention of parchment. Parchment made it possible to collect pages in a
codex which had big consequences on the user experience of the reader. I
quote Manguel: ‘The codex gave readers the opportunity to leaf through
pages almost directly; doing so they kept an idea from the text as a
whole –an idea intensified by the fact that the complete text rested in
the lap of the reader.’ So as a reader you keep the whole world in your
hands. [Judith Stoop, Paulien Kreutzer and Joost
Kircz](http://www.emeraldinsight.com/doi/abs/10.1108/NLW-01-2013-0012?journalCode=nlw) researched
changing reading habits among students and found out students prefer
to *print* the subject matter they have to acquire. By the way: this a
clear argument against going all digital with our schoollibraries. In
one interview [Miriam Rasch](http://vimeo.com/95271818) said: ‘What I
don’t like about a digital book is that It doesn’t give me a good idea
of where I am in the book.’

So reading a physical book can be a such meaningful and for me also a
pleasant experience because of a form and a substance working together.
This is the nostalgic part of my talk I guess. Manguel forgives me for
that. I quote: ‘It’s interesting how technological developments – the
invention of the printing press for instance  – often support the things
they seem to chase away. Technological developments make us even more
aware of old fashioned qualities we otherwise would have overlooked and
would have dismissed as irrelevant.’ Only have a look at the revival of
vinyl in the music industry to see a lot of truth in this
quote. [Designer Frank Kloos](http://vimeo.com/108371598), articulates
the qualities of the physical book like this: ‘I might be a Romantic but
I would have trouble with the disappearing of the physical book. A book
is quite a casual thing you carry around easily. ‘A book is a thing with
character where a tablet [or another reading device] is a dead
artefact.’ Kloos somewhat appologizes for his opinion. We don’t want to
be held backward or old fashioned. And this talk promised to give us an
idea on what a digital book can be instead of putting the physical book
on a pedestal. So let’s move to the digital world …

I can’t help wondering what Marshall McLuhan would have thought of some
of today’s popular practices in the field of digital publishing. What
would he for instance have thought of Apples Ibooks software as it is
displayed on an Ipad, mimicing the leafing of pages. This is the
frustration part of my talk. McLuhan surely would have brought the
horseless carriage syndrom to our minds: the first cars looked like
horse carriages. It helped users to get familiar with this new
technology. The writer of the blog who presents this image says there’s
also a positive side to that.

But still… Technically an ebook is nothing but a book, the technology
behind it could offer us a user experience that is really different from
the reading experience we know from the physical book. In the main
stream of things at the moment ebooks may offer us accessibility, ease
of use and convenience. But I would dare to say that a significant lot
of readers, just like Frank Kloos, secretly still prefer the old
fashioned book, despite the weight, and even despite the risk of being
held as old fashioned.

It might have a lot to do with this quality of keeping the whole world
in your hands.

I started my talk with Megan Hoogenboom who didn’t want to make a
horseless carriage. She asked yourself the question: how can I keep the
poetry of this remarkable poet from the twenties by using the unique
features of the electronic book. I figured out I wanted more examples of
this. What is it that makes the digital book stand for his own I asked
myself. The beginning of an answer I found in *Between Page and screen;
remaking literature through cinema and cyberspace,* a collection of
essay’s edited by the Utrechtse Hoogleraar Kiene Brillenburg and
published by Fordham University Press in 2012.

For now I’d like to focus on the essay ‘Intermediation’, written by
critic/scholar [N. Katherine
Hayles](http://literature.duke.edu/people?Uil=n.hayles&subpage=profile).
In all of her body of work she makes a point of showing how closely
humans and computers are related. ‘Literature in the twenty-first
century is computational’, she says. In her essay Hayles focusses on
digital literature, work that is ‘digitally born’ (I used this term
before as you might remember). I said the reading experience of a
digital book can contrast with the reading experience of the physical
book and in Hayles view that’s because of the constant flux of words and
images. They change as a results of our deeds: ‘Recombinant flux, as the
aesthetic of such works is called, gives a much stronger impression of
agency than does a book. […] Because the computer’s real agency, as well
as the illusion of its agency, is much stronger than with the book, *the
computer can function as a partner in creating intermediating dynamics
in ways that a book cannot*.’ (p. 108-109)

*The computer can function as a partner in creating intermediating
dynamics in ways that a book cannot …* Hayles therefore consequently
speaks of a player instead of a reader. In Hayles view a player has
another kind of control over the work he or she is involved with. One of
the examples she gives is an online work by Judd Morrissey, [*The Jew’s
Daughter*](http://www.thejewsdaughter.com/). Hovering over the page –
although I shouldn’t use that word – the letters change giving the
reader/player a sense of interaction. I quote Hayles again: ‘[digital
literature] is possessing a fluidity and mutability that ink durably
impressed on paper can never achieve, it stimulates the illusion of a
coherent stream-of-conciousness narrative (and by implication, a
coherent self producing the narrative).’ (p.123)

I would like to leave you with this idea that an electronic book can
posses ‘a fluidity and mutability that ink durably impressed on paper
can never achieve’. Please keep in mind that a digital page is not a
page. It might be ok to use your ereader for [reading
novels](http://www.boeken.com/ebooks/e-book-top-10/) as most people seem
to do but there’s really more to it. Physical books have irreplaceable
qualities, but electronic books have an interactive potential I at least
am looking forward to discover, by experimenting and research through
designing and prototyping.

Harold Konickx



# Out Now: From Print to Ebooks: a Hybrid Publishing Toolkit for the Arts {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [margreet
riphagen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/arjen/ "Posts by margreet riphagen"),
December 23, 2014 at 2:22 pm.

![](imgs/0419-HVA_DPT_from_print_to_ebooks_OS_epub-e1419344387128.png)

*From Print to Ebooks: a Hybrid Publishing Toolkit for the Arts*.

This Toolkit is meant for everyone working in art and design publishing.
No specific expertise of digital technology, or indeed traditional
publishing technology, is required. The Toolkit provides hands-on
practical advice and tools, focusing on working solutions for
low-budget, small-edition publishing.

It includes answers on questions like; Is electronic book technology
really the way forward for these types of publications? Or does the
answer lie in some hybrid form of publication, in which both print and
electronic editions of the same basic content can be published in a
parallel or complementary fashion? And perhaps more importantly, what
are the changes in workflow and design mentality that will need to be
implemented in order to allow for such hybrid publications?

Everything in the Hybrid Publishing Toolkit is based on real-world
projects with art and design publishers. Editorial scenarios include art
and design catalogues and periodicals, research publications, and
artists’/designer’s books.

[Download the EPUB
here.](http://networkcultures.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/FromPrintToEbooks.epub)



# Marije ten Brink: ‘Blendle is a promising idea’ {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [haroldkonickx](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/haroldkonickx/ "Posts by haroldkonickx"),
December 18, 2014 at 11:11 am.

HvA-teacher and designer Marije ten Brink wonders why Dutch entrepeneur
Alexander Klöpping has come up with the invention of
[Blendle](http://www.blendle.nl); a platform that combines ‘the best of
newspapers and magazines’ as it claims. The video is in Dutch.

![Video: http://vimeo.com/114679505](imgs/500443069_640.jpg)



# Presentation of the Toolkit in Brasil {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Miriam
Rasch](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michael/ "Posts by Miriam Rasch"),
December 11, 2014 at 11:34 am.

The Digital Publishing Toolkit was presented via Skype at the Simposio
Literatura e Informatica, with a focus on the INC project. You can find
the program, blog and videos of the symposium
[here](http://simposiodeliteraturaeinformatica.blogspot.com.br/).

![Video:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=\_DxW20\_hbZo](imgs/_DxW20_hbZo.jpg)



# Rose Leighton: ‘The craft of publishing is future-proof’ {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [haroldkonickx](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/haroldkonickx/ "Posts by haroldkonickx"),
December 9, 2014 at 4:48 pm.

Rose Leighton is a lecturer at the Hogeschool van Amsterdam and
projectmanager publishing for the Centre of Expertise ‘Amsterdam
Creative Industries’. She thinks that as the craft of publishing is
getting more and more digitized publishers should reconsider their role
to keep pace with the changing times. The first step in this process
could be to scrutinize the book sharply. Is a book still a book if you
digitize it? Or does it become something else? And íf a book for
instance becomes something like a game does that make a publisher still
a publisher or a producer of media?

![Video: http://vimeo.com/108984162](imgs/496311849_640.jpg)



# A wrap up of the Digital Publishing Toolkit – Florian Cramer and Geert Lovink {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Katía
Truijen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/katiatruijen/ "Posts by Katía Truijen"),
December 7, 2014 at 3:33 pm.

![](imgs/15276371604_5a8777d6b8_z.jpg)

![](imgs/15872825926_679111649e_z.jpg)

Geert Lovink and Florian Cramer conclude the afternoon by looking back
on two years of researching digital publishing; a succesful
collaboration between designers, schools, researchers and publishers.
Which lessons can we take from the research?

> *1. Digital publishing is still in a phase of transition*

When one compares reading and publishing to other media that have been
digitized over the past decades, one will see that publishing has
followed a different path. Indeed the field is changing, partly even in
a disruptive way, but it has not changed like the music industry,
newspaper industry or online video where one can see a consolidation of
business models.

In general, the publishing industry is still somewhat conservative
compared to other industries like those of magazines and journals. In
these fields there is a lot of experimentation and the Netherlands can
even be considered to be a pioneer with projects and business models
like [Blendle](https://blendle.nl/) and [de
Correspondent](https://decorrespondent.nl/). In other countries one can
already find some examples of distribution platforms for small
publishers, like [Minimore.de](https://minimore.de/) in Germany.

The fact that digital publishing is still in a transitional phase, is at
the same time very interesting. We may say that we are in the ‘Napster
moment’ in the printing industry. Geert Lovink states that when you
compare it to the rise of the Internet, it feels very much like 1995.
The systems are not yet working, but there is a lot of experiment and
research into different standards and platforms.

> *2. The electronic medium is often still (used as) a poor medium.*

Maybe digital publishing will remain in transition for the next couple
of years. Although there are no ‘solutions’ for the industry yet, a lot
has been achieved in the last two years. Effective working approaches
have been developed that work well in this transition phase. As an
overall conclusion one can state that much of these working methods
actually defy the expectations of what is *paper* and what is
*electronic*. The findings often have been counter-intuitive. For
example, the main expectations with electronic media is that they allow
for *rich* media, but there is still not much experimentation in this
field. Video is not often integrated into books to enrich the reading
experience. Why are multimedia books still rarely made?

Universities, art academies and applied universities still don’t combine
their expertise so much. In the field of filmstudies there are still
*books* on films instead of multimedia books. Another barrier is that
multimedia books would easily become multigigabyte files. Moreover, it
is very hard to get all the rights from film studios to include their
movies. But some of the obstacles also bring new opportunities. For
example, digital publishing allows for the creation of very small
formats that would never be printed as a book, like a
one-poem-publication.

> *3. The publishing triangle has become a square*

In the triangle of authors, designers and publishers, there is now
another role to take into account. In digital publishing, the role of
the programmer has become very important. This means that people have to
collaborate in new and different ways. All traditional roles have to be
redefined to a certain extent.

> *4. We need more research on business models*

The project of the Digital Publishing Toolkit mainly focused on design
and production questions in collaboration with publishers. More research
has to be done on distribution and business models. These issues are
highly important for authors and publishers.

> *5. Sometimes we need to temper our (magic) expectations*

In the Netherlands there is an urgency to develop new formats for 
journals, especially because there have been serious budget cuts in this
field. Very often there is a magic expectation that digitization will
solve all problems. Indeed, more readers can be reached with digital
publishing, but the idea that it is cheaper than a printed version is a
myth. Often it is very hard to make money with digital content. A
compromise to simply export a print version into an epub often doesn’t
work at all. Different media ask for different workflows and specific
approaches.

> *6. Digital publishing has physical impact*

The two main places for books – the library and the bookshop – changed
dramatically with the rise of digital publishing. It has an enormous
impact on these environments, that are forced to reinvent themselves. It
would be good to extend the research on digital publishing and take the
wider urban context into account. The transformation of the bookshop and
the library have a direct link to the developments of e-books. What
would be the future of the bookstore and the library?

Libraries may be redefined as centers for digital literacy. After all,
there is a lot of expertise to be found in these environments. Another
interesting development to research is social reading. What tools can we
use in classes to combine deep reading of a text with discussion?

> *7. We need to develop alternatives*

The dystopian version of the future electronic bookmarket would be an
iTunes or NetFlix model. In the future there may be big commercial
providers that will offer full education packages that give access to
all books and publications. If schools subscribe to these kinds of
licences, libraries will be shut down. We should be aware of this kind
of neoliberal optimization of educational resources. If we don’t develop
alternatives, it may be too late.



# Silvio Lorusso ‘The Post-Digital Publishing Archive: An Inventory of Speculative Strategies’ {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Katía
Truijen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/katiatruijen/ "Posts by Katía Truijen"),
December 6, 2014 at 10:07 pm.

![](imgs/Schermafbeelding-2014-12-05-om-10.27.53.png)

![](imgs/15279147033_9216c0be33_z.jpg)

[Silvio Lorusso](http://silviolorusso.com/) is an artist and desiger and
PhD Candidate in Design Sciences at Iuav University of Venice. He
investigates experimental publishing informed by digital technology and
has created the [Post-Digital Publishing Archive](http://p-dpa.net/).
During the Digital Publishing Showcase, Lorusso presented an overview of
speculative strategies and best practices of experimental digital
publishing.

The [Post-Digital Publishing Archive](http://p-dpa.net/) is a research
and curatorial platform aimed at systematically collecting, organizing
and keeping trace of experiences in the fields of art and design that
explore the relationships between publishing and digital technology.

Lorusso explains that experimental practices emerge in the fields of
critical and speculative design, critical making, e-literature, artists
books and digital humanities. The critical design project The [DRM
Chair](http://vimeo.com/60475086)by Les Sugus for example, has only a
limited number of use (8 times) before it self-destructs. The project
refers to digital rights management, a system that is often used for
digital books to prevent unlimited sharing. Projects like the DRM Chair
expose the inner workings of (digital) systems.

![Video: http://vimeo.com/60475086](imgs/419644379_640.jpg)

Lorusso explains that according to [Mike
Shatzkin](http://www.idealog.com/about-us/about-mike-shatzkin/), digital
publishing has becomes a *function* instead of an industry. Some artists
and designers play with this idea. James Bridle for example
automatically generated the publication [*My Life in
Tweets*](http://booktwo.org/notebook/vanity-press-plus-the-tweetbook/)that
simply contains all his tweets of two years. Another example is
[FOMO](http://www.spacecaviar.net/projects/fomo/) by Space Caviar, a
selfgenerated magazine that contains social media interactions based on
a hashtag.

Lorusso wonders how we would characterize digital publishing if we
understand it as merely a function. How can we  escape a generic service
model? And how to take advantage of the opportunities that digital
publishing allows for? ‘If digital publishing is indeed a function,
let’s actually *perform* this function’, he states.

Why not playing with the tools that we are already familiar with?
Lorusso argues that not many people are aware of the fact that Microsoft
Word is not so much a software product, but it can actually be
understood as a language. Microsoft Word 2008 even has an
‘AutoSummarize’ 10-sentence function that examines the document and
‘picks the sentences most relevant to the main theme’. Lorusso refers to
the [project of Jason
Huff](http://www.jason-huff.com/projects/autosummarize/), who has
summarized the 100 most downloaded free books including Metamorphosis
and the Illiad. It’s interesting to ask who would be the author of this
book. Is it Kafka? Microsoft Word? Or Jason Huff?



![](imgs/08.jpg)
Just in Time, or A Short History of Production by Xavier Antin



There are more artists that reflect on the tools that are used for
publishing. Xavier Antin for example has created [an
installation](http://www.xavierantin.fr/archive/Just-In-Time/) that
consists of four printers from different periods in time that all print
one colour. By letting the tools express themselves it shows that tools
are never neutral. They all bring their own constrains, systems and
aesthetics.

Lorusso argues that because of digital technologies and software, there
has been a paradigm shift in publishing from creating to curating.
Kenneth Goldsmith explains this process in his book [*Uncreative
Writing.*](http://www.amazon.com/Uncreative-Writing-Managing-Language-Digital/dp/0231149913)It
explores how techniques like word processing, databasing and intensive
programming have influenced the act of writing.

More and more artists and designers experiment with publishing through
collecting and filtering. Roger Ebert for example has created [The
Collected Wikipedia
Edits](http://www.quentonmiller.com/roger-ebert-the-collected-wikipedia-edits/)
by publishing all edits by Wikipedians on specific articles. A rather
hilarious example is [Working On My
Novel](http://novel.coryarcangel.com/)by Cory Arcangel, who has created
a book with tweets that include “working on my novel”. Interestingly
enough Penguin has actually published the book. According to Lorusso it
shows that these kind of strategies are becoming more and more
mainstream.

The issue with digital publishing is often that it requires a lot of
labour to do it well and to make it work for every single format. This
way compromises must be made in terms of functionality. The examples of
Lorusso show that many artists play with existing formats by taking
advantage of their specific features. By exposing these features through
art and design, we may create a better understanding of what digital
publishing will look like in the (near) future.

*More speculative strategies can be found in the [Post-Digital
Publishing Archive](http://p-dpa.net/).*

![Video: http://vimeo.com/114339867](imgs/499982828_640.jpg)



# Towards a hybrid workflow: editor, designer and developer UNITE! {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Becky
Cachia](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/beckycachia/ "Posts by Becky Cachia"),
November 30, 2014 at 5:48 pm.

In the final showcase of the Digital
Publishing Toolkit event in November 2014, Michael Murtaugh presented on
behalf of the rest of the **Institute of Network Cultures subgroup** –
that includes Joost Kircz, Silvio Lorusso, Miriam Rasch and Kimmy
Spreeuwenberg – to answer the question:

***How can small edition, low budget publishing houses edit, design, and
develop a new, hybrid workflow for editing, designing and developing?***

The INC subgroup has developed and optimised a workflow for print and
digital publications to make the process of publishing on different
platforms and in different formats easier and more efficient. Murtaugh
gave a concise overview of their **“hybrid workflow”** by firstly
explaining what is meant by “hybridity”. Within the publishing process,
hybridity refers to a multitude of different things, including different
screen sizes and technologies as well as print vs. digital.

Murtaugh stressed that **“hybridity” also denotes the diverse dynamics
of different reading practices.** People read in an increasing variety
of ways and therefore associate different devices with distinct reading
situations. For example, along with people believing that the physical
book can never be replaced, there are those that feel that reading off a
phone is ideal in some situations whereas using an e-reader or a tablet
is appropriate in other contexts. Therefore, it is interesting to think
of e-readers not only in relation to the conventional idea of “a book”
but also in relation to other electronic devices.

The dynamics of different reading practices and print or digital devices
therefore **demands hybridity in the practices of publishing** and the
goal of the INC subgroup was **to connect the existing publishing
practices and to suggest new ways of working.** Rather than regarding
roles in isolation, e.g. viewing the author, editor, designer and
developer as separate entities, the aim was to build bridges and connect
the different roles through the tools being used and through a feedback
system of “talking back to each other”. In this way, could new ouptuts
then influence and be fed back into, for example, new ways of writing?

Through their own workflow for this project, the INC subgroup organised
monthly work sessions in order to create situations where team members
could look over each other’s shoulders to fully understand what each
person was doing and how they were doing it. The group could experience
first hand the benefits and challenges of fine-tuning a hybrid workflow,
and could create a system that addresses the challenges of a dynamic
publishing process through being both structured and yet flexible.

## The creation of “How-to & Style Guides”:

![](imgs/15898637095_6696785138_z.jpg)

**[How-to](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/10/21/hybrid-workflow-how-to-making-automated-workflows-part-1/)**
and **[Style
Guides](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/10/21/style-guide-for-hybrid-publishing/),**
and running workshops in which the roles of editors, designers and
developers overlap, the digital publication is not simply added onto the
end of the existing print-centred publishing workflow, but can already
inform each step of the process. The idea of constant feedback and
output influencing each step of the process breaks down the linearity of
the workflow and creates single source, multi-format publishing. By
bridging practices, each member of the workflow can work using the same
standard set of style features or even avoiding certain formatting
features that would make the process easier in the long run.

## Using a set of hybrid tools:

![](imgs/15896641151_4aa3c985f7_z.jpg)

[a set of tools was put
together](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/10/21/hybrid-workflow-how-to-making-automated-workflows-part-2/)
(namely, Markdown, Git, Pandoc and Make). These are tools that come from
a long history of programming practices and are therefore very robust.
In addition, because lots of different programmers work with them, they
are very flexible. For example, the choice to use Markdown means that
the text is reduced to the very core of what it is. There are no
stylistic enhancements or automatic rendering of the text (as is common
in word processing, for instance). The text is a ‘clean’ source that can
then be interpreted by the designer for the medium specific elements of,
for example, different devices for reading.

## Looking ahead

Murtaugh ended the showcase by looking ahead to where the development of
a hybrid workflow and EPUBs can be taken.

– An EPUB player is currently in development, which is a way to look at
an EPUB online in a browser without having to generate a different html
version. Through the player, an EPUB can be embedded into a website and
pages can also be bookmarked and then exported as a separate EPUB.
Murtaugh referred to this as being **“kind of like a photocopier for the
book”**, whereby the EPUB you export is not a perfect publication, but
it is still very useful for yourself (just like the pages of a book you
photocopy).

– Secondly, Murtaugh gave a brief overview of having a hybrid editor,
which is an attempt to make something that is in between the different
kinds of working/publishing interfaces and tools we normally see. It is
an integrated tool whose different parts come from somewhere else (e.g.
from other open source tools), but they are all brought into the same
interface. Murtaugh, ended the showcase by claiming that **it is
exciting to think of interfaces that can offer this kind of hybridity
and functionalities.**



# Showcase nai010 uitgevers | My Collection {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [roserowson](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/roserowson/ "Posts by roserowson"),
November 30, 2014 at 8:55 pm.



![](imgs/15896794701_c77552a06c_o.jpg)
Mark de Bruin of PuntPixel



During the showcase for [nai010 uitgevers](http://www.nai010.com/en/),
we were shown a new mobile application developed by PUNTPIXEL and
[Medamo](http://www.medamo.nl/). [My
Highlights](http://puntpixel.nl/myhighlights-uit-de-collectie-van-het-stedelijk-museum-amsterdam/)
lets users create their own, personal ePub from the collection of the
[Stedelijk Museum](http://www.stedelijk.nl/en) in Amsterdam. The
application allows users to search by genre, period, artist and so on to
assemble their own personal impressions from the collection, and
prioritise content. Presenters Marc de Bruijn and Barbara Lateur noted
that this form of curation could be used, for example, by a layman
wishing to plan their visit to the museum, or a student planning for
their thesis. Moreover, the model could easily be transferred to any
practice with diverse and structurable data requiring this type of
cataloguing, such as a stamp collection.

When demonstrating the application via an iPhone projection, Marc de
Bruijn showed how to navigate the interface of My Highlights.
Information on different pieces in the collection is available for free,
while users may choose to pay a small amount for additional material
such as essays on artists and individual works. This aspect of the
application is still in development; when it is fully operational, users
will be able to compile their ePub, pay for any additional content using
an inbuilt payment gateway and export their final product, to be viewed
online within My Highlights, or offline in the external application of
their choice.

The mock-up version of the iOS application de Bruijn showed us was
created using Phonegap and WordPress to mimic the functionality of the
final version. As an application concerned with creating ePubs, de
Bruijn noted that the final versions of user curated ePubs may well be
viewed in an external application. With the wide range of these
applications available, this is arguably a concern for any group in the
business of producing ePubs. Upon its launch, we shall see how
successfully content from within My Highlights can be viewed outside of
its sleek interface.

![Video: http://vimeo.com/114339866](imgs/499982559_640.jpg)



# Showcase BIS Publishers | Phone gap & multi-channel publishing {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [roserowson](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/roserowson/ "Posts by roserowson"),
November 30, 2014 at 8:51 pm.

Presenting on behalf of the design agency
[Essense](http://essense.eu/about/ "Essense"), Arjen de Jong began by
positing the essential question for working with [BIS
Publishers](http://www.bispublishers.nl/index.php) to create an ebook:
**(How) can we make rich media, highly interactive publications,
accessible on multiple devices at a reasonable cost?**



![](imgs/15712746169_68c3084661_o.jpg)
Arjen de Jong presenting for Essense



As a publishing house, BIS is renowned for its innovative approach to
graphic design and visual culture as a whole; in order to fittingly
represent their brand in the field of digital books, it was essential
for Essense transfer this rich media approach. But how can this be
achieved in the digital realm, especially when combined with additional
characteristics such as interactivity and cross-device compatibility?
The inclusion of these specifically digital elements to a book allows
greater scope for creativity, while simultaneously causing potential
problems of executability.

One interactive element de Jong identified was the potential
non-linearity of digital books. On a “page” level, they could include
individual interactive panels, but beyond this they could also allow
readers to jump in between different sections of the text, while still
maintaining a sense of wholeness of the book. This potential flexibility
of the medium is demonstrated and hindered by readers using multiple
devices. While this allows greater levels of portability and
multichannel engagement for users, it also creates a greater level of
complexity for designers, who must ensure that content translates well
across devices.

While multiple device use is common, de Jong and his team made the
decision to focus their ebook development on tablets. He cited a reason
for this as, firstly, the inability for e-reader hardware such as a
Kindle that uses e-ink to show the kind of rich media that was required
for the publication, and secondly, that the e-reader has been
transforming into a more tablet-like device, shown, for example, by the
Kindle Fire. The focus on tablets furthermore allowed access to open,
flexible and sustainable formats: ideal conditions for developing a new
way to view e-publications.

After trying to work with various different developing tools and
identifying their shortcomings for tackling the task at hand, Essense
settled upon
[PhoneGap](https://creative.adobe.com/products/phonegap-build), due to
its usability, integration of web code and compatibility across
platforms via the Cloud. Experimenting with
[Markdown](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown) to write their code on
multiple channels, transforming it into HTML and then transferring it
into Phonegap, de Jong and his team were pleased with their results but
nonetheless acknowledged that there was still some way to go towards
perfecting the kind of e-publication they were setting out to make.

In this brief presentation, de Jong demonstrated that creating an
e-publication to fit the specifications of a client is often easier said
that done. The integration of the myriad potentials for these digital
books is often as much of a hindrance as it is inspiring. Nevertheless,
from the work that has been done by de Jong and his team, it is clear
that this kind of e-book is certainly possible, and opens up creative
doors for innovators such as BIS Publishers.



# Harold Konickx | It’s not a page; new familiar ways of book design {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [roserowson](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/roserowson/ "Posts by roserowson"),
November 30, 2014 at 9:48 pm.

During his brief talk nearing the end of the afternoon’s presentations,
Harold Konickx spent fifteen minutes discussing the changing face of the
page in the wake of digital publishing. He began by quoting Marshall
McLuhan, noting that “an environment becomes fully visible only when it
has been superseded by a new environment; thus we are always one step
behind in our view of the world”. This quote was employed as a way of
asking the question, how do readers and designers of digital books
relate to the page now that they are not dealing with a page in itself?
As Konickx asked, evoking McLuhan once more, “Are we ready for a
different kind of page… or are we trapped in a rear-view mirror view of
our world?”

**Reader; Designer; Book**

As a means of grounding his research on digital publishing, Konickx
focusses on the relationship between reader, designer and book. His
first case study to demonstrate this was the work of Megan Hoogenboom,
and specifically her ePub version of the poem [“Boem Paukeslag” by Paul
van
Ostaijen](http://www.meganhoogenboom.nl/index.php/boeken/digitaal-boek/24-epub-boem-paukeslag).
Konickx noted that while this kind of poetry depends on specific
formatting, taking spacing and fonts into consideration, for example,
Hoogenboom successfully translated the poem into ePub format by
transcending the usual role of the page, reinventing the part it is
meant to play and “overcoming the so-called boundaries of ePub”.

Konickx argued that Hoogenboom touched on the core of what a book is
through this work; but what exactly is a book if it is not a collection
of physical pages? The traditional notion of the book is very much bound
by content as well as form. Surely drawing on Kittler’s work in
[*Software Studies: A
Lexicon*](http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/software-studies), Konickx
evoked the example of the codex, noting how the development of parchment
allowed the creation of the book as a whole, and on the part of the
reader allowing them to feel as if they were holding “the whole world”
in their hands. In particular here, Konickx cited Miriam Rasch as
stating that digital books do not allow one to really feel what point
they are at within a book: physical books, on the other hand, allow
substance and form to work together to create a pleasurable mental and
tactile experience.



![](imgs/15896641321_a4a911d2b5_o.jpg)
Harold Konickx takes us through Alberto Manguel



Konickx is well aware of the nostalgic qualities of his research. Just
as with McLuhan, he nodded to [Alberto
Manguel’s](http://www.alberto.manguel.com/) argument that new
technological developments make us more aware of old fashioned qualities
we would otherwise have overlooked. A possible analogy of this, Konickx
argued, is being currently demonstrated within the musical community
with the rise in use of vinyl records. While accepting the love of books
as objects is romantic, and books having desirably qualities in and of
themselves, the session was not about putting the physical book on a
pedestal.

**The Digital**



![](imgs/15898638565_6f3d80237f_o.jpg)
Skeuomorphism on iBooks



Considering the skeuomorphism present in Apple’s iBooks software,
Konickx lucidly brought us back to McLuhan’s horseless carriage
syndrome, wherein the first motor vehicles where designed to resemble
horse drawn carriages in order to acclimatise the general public to
their presence on the road. But despite the illusion of pages turning as
shown in this image, Konickx argues that ebooks do, in fact, promote a
far different experience than that of reading a printed book. Despite
identifying ebooks as being essentially networked, Konickx returned to
the description of physical books as a positive experience of allowing
readers to have the whole world in their hands; I suppose that in this
instance, the limits of a world – i.e., the end of the book – are more
appealing than a world that is seemingly endless.

Returning to Megan Hoogenboom, Konickx used her work as an example to
show that the potential success of the ebook as a medium lies in the
acceptance of its own specific capabilities. What makes a digital book
stand on its own? Konickx pointed us towards [*Between Page and Screen:
Remaking Literature through Cinema and
Cyberspace*](http://fordhampress.com/index.php/between-page-and-screen-paperback.html)
as an extensive collection of essays, published in 2012, as a means of
establishing a discourse on the subject.

**Intermediation**

Coming to the end of his talk, Konickx moved to N. Katherine Hayles’
essay “Intermediation”. Throughout her work, Hayles has been drawing
comparisons between humans and computers to make a claim on our
inter-relation. She argues that literature throughout the 20th century
is computational. Konickx believes that the reading of a physical book
lies in stark difference to the reading of a digital; Hayles would agree
with this, and propose that this difference lies in the constant flux of
words and images that change as a result of our needs. Moreover, Hayles
argues that “a computer can function as a partner in creating
intermediary dynamics in ways that a book cannot,” placing more agency
to a computer as opposed to its printed and bound counterpart. According
to Hayles, engagers with digital books are players rather than readers,
as they have more control over what they are consuming. Hayles’ primary
example of this is Judd Morrissey’s [The Jew’s
Daughter](http://thejewsdaughter.com/), a form of digital literature,
she argues, would be impossible when combined with the durability of
ink.

Konickx left us with this example, and by finally reminding us that a
digital page is not a page, at least not in the same way as a physical
book. These physical books have irreplaceable qualities, but digital
books have new qualities that have yet to be fully explored through
experimentation and the development of new ways of creation, and of
engagement.



# Context Without Walls – a generative workflow with EPUBster (Digital Publishing Toolkit November 2014) {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Becky
Cachia](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/beckycachia/ "Posts by Becky Cachia"),
November 30, 2014 at 5:40 pm.

The second showcase of the Digital Publishing Toolkit conference
highlighted the collaborative work of the subgroup of
[Valiz](http://www.valiz.nl/), [Meeus
Ontwerpt](http://www.meeusontwerpt.nl/) and
[PUNTPIXEL](http://www.puntpixel.nl/): *Context Without Walls – a
generative workflow with EPUBster*.

The aim of the project was to create a digital (EPUB) version of [Common
Skin](http://www.valiz.nl/en/CommonSkin), a publication within the
series [Context Without Walls](http://www.valiz.nl/en/Plans#col3). This
series of print publications – developed by Valiz and designed by Meeus
Ontwerpt – focuses on contemporary artists worldwide through both essays
and images.

 

![](imgs/15279147793_28b308f45e_z.jpg)

**the process of digitalising *Common Skin* was very challenging and
ambitious.** As part of a series with meticulous and extensive design,
it was difficult to do the publication the same justice in a digital
format. To attempt to do so, they created an [online and open source
tool](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/epubster) – called
[EPUBster](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/11/19/developing-epubster/)
– to create, edit and publish this particular publication as well as to
enable other designers, developers and publishers to create their own
digital publications.

 

![](imgs/15711295808_a30cb2552d_z.jpg)

*EPUBster* as a web application for the creation and editing of digital
publications. The tool was developed as a general purpose tool, although
it does have some specific functionalities for Valiz and Meeus
Ontwerpt’s “Context Without Walls” series.

Sybesma provided a concise overview of *EPUBster* by running the
audience through the **four main components of the tool’s
straightforward user interface**:

-   its metadata editor;
-   the chapter editor (for the re-arranging of chapters);
-   the functionalities of its content editors (both visual and plain
    text);
-   the design features (to add a book cover and CSS styling).

The four sections create a very flexible workflow in which the user can
switch between sections at any point in the creation process. Once the
user has filled in all the required metadata and finished creating,
editing and styling chapters and content, the EPUB can be generated. You
can read more about the development of EPUBster
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/11/19/developing-epubster/).

 

![](imgs/15898137982_08b8b11a73_z.jpg)

*Common Skin* to demonstrate the rich layers of text and imagery they
were presented with. As an academic text, there were a lot of footnotes,
quotes and index words. Therefore, **they created a book that showed
this rich layered text by incorporating many layers around the core
text.** For example, the margins contain index words to serve as both an
entrance to the text and to build a vocabulary for the series.

![](imgs/CWW_Binnenwerk_papier4.jpg)

Janne and Hilde expressed that when they originally started the project
of transforming the book into a digital version, they wanted to retain
and expand on these characteristics that they had developed for the
print version. They started off with a lot of exciting ideas for the
digital version, e.g. incorporating videos and interactive margins, but
they soon realised that, if they wanted the digital book to be accessed
through different devices, they would not be able to incorporate the
characteristics of their dreams. **The only way to retain the potential
for the spread of the book was to focus on making a simple EPUB that
could be read by all devices.**

In doing so, they were restricted in many ways. For instance, they could
only use open source typefaces, margin features where not possible, and
the design elements were, more often than not, stripped from the book,
by the device. **They were left with the question: Is there anything
left to design?**

In describing the process of creating the digital version of *Common
Skin*, Janne and Hilde showed that they were overwhelmed by the feeling
that **EPUBs are not controlled by people but rather by machines.**
Therefore, their role as designers was simply to ensure that they could
produce an error-free publication so as not to disturb the reading
process.

[The end product had to change a lot from the print
version](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/10/08/translating-a-paper-book-design-to-a-simple-e-pub-design/),
e.g. different colours, typefaces, and the elimination of notes from the
margins. After trying to use EPUBster as well as working with PUNTPIXEL
to make EPUBster suit their needs, Meeus Ontwerpt needed to look to
other tools to minimise the amount of problems they were being faced
with. In the end, the EPUB was created using an EPUB editor called
Sigil.

## Reflection

Upon completing the book, Janne and Hilde asked the question, **“What
can the role of the designer be in the digital publishing process, if it
is not only to make an EPUB that is free from errors?”** They now see
the potential for experimentation and feel that there are indeed a lot
of possibilities but they are at present not evident and will only be
exposed through further experimentation.



# Collaborative workflows {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Andre
Castro](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/andre/ "Posts by Andre Castro"),
November 25, 2014 at 2:56 pm.

During the Showcase of the Digital Publishing Toolkit Michael Murtaugh
gave a presentation entitled [Towards a hybrid workflow: editor,
designer and developer
UNITE!](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/11/30/towards-a-hybrid-workflow-editor-designer-and-developer-unite/),
that resonated strongly with my experience of creating [The Volkskrant
Building](http://networkcultures.org/blog/publication/the-volkskrant-building-manufacturing-difference-in-amsterdams-creative-city-boukje-cnossen-and-sebastian-olma/)
ebook by Boukje Cnossen and Sebastian Olma. In a previous
[blogpost](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/11/23/making-the-volkskrantbuilding-epub/)
I half-heartedly criticized the top-down dynamic experienced during the
development of that publication. Now I’d like to pick up where I left
and try to turn my frustrations into constructive ideas, that might be
useful in the production of hybrid publication within small, low-budged,
DIY contexts.

I am critical not of a division of labor in the production of
publication. I believe each of the actors involved, being either an
author, editor, designer, or developer, should work in his/her area of
expertise. Yet, I firmly oppose the situation where each of these actors
develop his/her share of the publication in an island, only interrupted
by sporadic contacts with the other actors, taking part in the
*collective* and complex effort of publishing a book in more than one
medium.

Such criticism begs the question: **How can publishing workflows change
into collaborative, horizontal, flexible and inventive environments,
which can resolve and profit from the challenges brought by hybrid
publishing?** How can teams of authors, editors, developers and
designers work collaboratively under a joint and self-reflective
workflow, instead of a series of parallel and independent workflows?

Miriam Rasch (editor for the Institute of Network Cultures’
publications, in which I have worked as a developer) makes a good point
on a
[blogpost](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/10/28/how-to-handle-corrections-in-a-hybrid-workflow/)
where she mentions her necessity as an editor to proof-read the
publication’s text in its designed form. This prerequisite is easily
understandable. A carefully designed publication encourages a more
focused reading experience than a computer screen or the printout of a
MS Word document. Rasch further explains how the corrections’ are
implemented in INC’s hybrid publication: “usually marked by the editor
and then issued to the designer, who will process them in the InDesign
file, and to the developer who will do the same in the EPUB”. Rasch
argues that “it seems impossible to avoid multiple work on corrections,
meaning both editor, designer, and developer might have to put them
through in their respective files”.

Rather than calling the described approach *a workflow*, I would risk
describing it as a workflow made of multiple workflows, which develop in
parallel to each other. The figure bellow attempts to present a visual
representation of a parallel workflow. Each actor works on his/her
stream, aiming for a specific output. The streams don’t intersect, and
changes such as corrections, have to be implemented individually in each
stream, from top to bottom.



![](imgs/workflow_02.png)
Parallel workflows



I disagree with Miriam Rasch when she affirms that “it seems impossible
to avoid multiple work on corrections”. And strongly believe that the
parallel workflow INC has so far followed is not only inefficient. It is
a handicap, when applied to hybrid publishing, ultimately forcing
publishers to exclude the possibility of publishing works in more than
one format.

**How to work on a single, collaborative workflow?** Contrary to what
Miriam Rasch argues I am convinced that the implementation of
corrections does not need to be repeated for each of the book’s outputs.
In my view, a collaborative workflow structured around source files and
a version control system, can cut down this process, and others which
would normally require an implemented across the multiple publication’s
output, into a single implementation. The following figure presents a
possible visual representation of such collaborative workflow.



![](imgs/workflow_01.png)
Collaborative workflow



In such workflow the Markdown is the markup language chosen for the
source files. They constitute the malleable and changeable building
blocks from which the workflow’s outputs are generated. Git – the
distributed version control system –, is both the project’s safety net
and the link between its various actors. It keeps track of changes in
the source files, and syncs them across the source file copies kept by
author, editor, designer and developer. Working under this scheme allows
all the actors involved in the workflow to intervene upon the source
files, and be sure that their changes will be incorporated into the
source files kept by all the other actors.

Like in the current INC’s workflow for hybrid publications, the proposed
collaborative workflow begins with author and editor working on the
manuscript in .docx format. The editor applies a [style
guide](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/10/21/style-guide-for-hybrid-publishing/)
to the manuscript, which make for a seemingly conversion to Markdown.
Once the manuscript is correctly formatted it is converted into Markdown
source files, and never used again.

The next stage revolves entirely around the Markdown source files – here
my proposal starts to diverge from INC’s current workflow. Whereas in
the current workflow Markdown source files are only of interest to the
developer and at times the editor, in proposed collaborative workflow
all actors work on the Markdown source files. They all contribute to its
preparation for the next stage of conversions. At this stage, among
other actions, the colophon is introduced, footnotes are checked,
figures placed, URLs are hyperlinked.

Once all this supplementary information has been introduced into the
Markdown source files the workflow enters in its conversion stage. The
source files are converted into the various output formats and the
workflow splits into branches, dedicated to each of the outputs. Such
separation does not mean that the actors will become disconnected,
instead they remain connected through the source files. To exemplify
this interconnection of production branches take the case of last minute
corrections. In this scenario the editor receives a draft of the design
for paper book. While reading it she finds typos and elements that need
to be altered. In a collaborative workflow she can implement the
necessary changes directly to the Markdown source file. Both designer
and developer, being notified of such change, sync their Markdown source
files to the editor’s version – a trivial process in Git tracked
projects. The three now have their Markdown source files in their latest
version, which include the editor’s last minute changes. Both designer
and developer only need to integrate those changes into their respective
projects, destined to become one of the publication’s outputs. The EPUB
developer can incorporate the introduced changes by producing a new EPUP
version, via a Makefile, as described in [Making the
VolkskrantBuilding.epub
blogpost](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/11/23/making-the-volkskrantbuilding-epub/).
For the designer, changes can be incorporated into the inDesign (or
[Scribus](http://scribus.net/canvas/Scribus)) project through the
conversion of the Markdown source file into an ICML file – As described
by Silvio Lorusso in the [Markdown to Indesign with Pandoc (via ICML)
blogpost](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/10/08/markdown-to-indesign-with-pandoc-via-icml/),
importing an ICML file into an inDesign project permits updating both
content and structure, without affecting the project’s design decisions.
In both cases, content changes in the source files, can be incorporated
into the various design projects, destined to produce the publication’s
outputs, without affecting any or reverting prior design and development
work.

The advantages of such collaborative and lean working methodology for
hybrid publications seems clear. I believe it promotes an efficient
architecture where time isn’t wasted on replicating the same actions for
each of the publication’s output. More importantly, it fosters a dynamic
where editor, designer, developer and author work closer and
interdependently, and the output is only one conversion away from the
publication’s source. If instead, publishers choose to develop hybrid
publications under the same methods they have developed for
single-output publications, I am inclined to believe they wont be able
to sustain the demands of such approach, and hybrid publishing will be
nothing more but a distant dream, that ended up costing too much time
and money.



# Making the VolkskrantBuilding.epub {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Andre
Castro](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/andre/ "Posts by Andre Castro"),
November 23, 2014 at 3:02 pm.

![](imgs/stream1.jpg)

![](imgs/cook_TVB_sml.jpg)

![](imgs/trailer-TheVolkskrantBuilding.gif)

Last week [The Institute of Network
Cultures](http://networkcultures.org/) and [Amsterdam Creative
Industries Network](http://amsterdamcreativeindustries.com/) launched
the publication [The Volkskrant Building: Manufacturing Difference in
Amsterdam’s Creative
City](http://networkcultures.org/blog/publication/the-volkskrant-building-manufacturing-difference-in-amsterdams-creative-city-boukje-cnossen-and-sebastian-olma/)
(TVB) by Boukje Cnossen and Sebastian Olma. I use this post to share the
process that led to the production of its EPUB edition.

From the onset it was clear that TVB had to go from manuscript to its
two output format – EPUB and paper – in little more than one week. We
were starting from good position: the manuscript, a .docx file, was in
its final form and had been carefully edited, with all of its text
formatting accomplished through styles, as described by Miriam Rasch in
the [Style Guide for Hybrid Publishing
blog-post](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/10/21/style-guide-for-hybrid-publishing/).
This consistency of the manuscript allows for the necessary format
conversions to be performed with ease and little obstructions. Despite
this advantage, the short time span available for the production of TVB
remained a challenge. While [UNDOG](http://www.undog.nl/) design studio
worked on the identity of the book, I developed the EPUB. This meant I
had to follow the studio’s lead, wait for its work to be completed, and
only then could I apply the same identity to the EPUB edition. The
adoption of such dynamic, in hybrid workflows, is highly questionable,
given its inefficiency and imposition of top-down dynamic instead of a
more collaborative and egalitarian approach between all of those
involved in the production of a book, but that is in itself subject for
another blog post.

In my usual method for creating EPUBs I use:

-   [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax)
    source-files: a plain-text markup language, used to do most of the
    work on the book’s text; It can perhaps be best described as a
    preparatory document for the generation of the EPUB, where all
    content, text-formatting and structure of the EPUB are already
    present, under a simpler form.
-   [Pandoc](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/): the conversion
    software, that translates between different markup languages. In
    this case I used Pandoc to convert the manuscript from .docx to
    Markdown and from Markdown to EPUB3;
-   [Git](http://git-scm.com/): the versioning system which tracks the
    history of changes the sources files undergo during the production
    of the EPUB.

For the production of the TVB ebook, in addition to these tools I chose
to use a Makefile, in a similar way as described by Michael Murtaugh in
the [Make Book blog
post](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/10/01/make-book/).
The Makefile became center of operations that compiled all the source
files and addressed them to Pandoc, to be converted into an EPUB.

The Makefile used in the production of TVB EPUB:

    VolkskrantBuilding.epub: 
        cd docs && pandoc \
        --from markdown \
        --to epub3 \
        --self-contained \
        --epub-chapter-level=1 \
        --toc-depth=2 \
        --epub-cover-image=media/cover.png \
        --epub-metadata=metadata.xml \
        --epub-stylesheet=styles.epub.css \
        --epub-embed-font=VAGRoundedStd-Black.otf \
        --epub-embed-font=VAGRoundedStd-Bold.otf \
        --epub-embed-font=VAGRoundedStd-Light.otf \
        --epub-embed-font=VAGRoundedStd-Thin.otf \
        --default-image-extension png \
        -o VolkskrantBuilding.epub \
        VK.md

This approach centered on a Makefile allowed me to narrow my focus to
the source files and the Makefile. As a result it sped-up and simplified
the development process. The source files – the Markdown text files,
images, metadata, CSS styles – became the ingredients necessary to cook
this EPUB dish and the recipe, where the Makefile was the
recipe.`make VolkskrantBuilding.epub`. Once the `make` command was
executed I’d evaluate the result. If I happened to dislike the dish I
just created, I would very simply adjust the ingredients or the recipe.
I iterates through this circle, fine-tuning ingredients and recipe,
cooking, and tasting, until I got to a satisfactory EPUB.

The described approach contrasts with my default method for producing
EPUBs. Usually I create a rough EPUB with Pandoc, unzip it and start
working on its constituent files – editing the metadata inside
content.opf, the stylesheet, or the content .xhtml files. When all
editing is done I zip the files back into an EPUB and look at the
result. I repeat the whole process few more times until I am happy with
the outcome. If I carry on with the culinary analogies I’d say that this
approach would be like cooking an already cooked dish. The EPUB is in
front of me, and what I do is separate its different parts, change them
individually, and then put them back together in a slightly different
dish. Although it works, this approach is somehow unfocused, slow, and
forces me to work with HTML files. Although HTML is a powerful, and yet
simple markup language, its unrendered source is unpleasant to either
read or edit. Edit large sections of text wrapped by countless HTML tags
instinctively feels like a recipe for disaster.

With the Makefile approach I am spared from working with HTML. Instead I
deal mostly with Markdown source files, which contrarily to HTML are
easy to read and edit and can be quickly compiled into an EPUB. The
feedback loop between a change and its effect on the EPUB become much
shorter and direct. Even in cases of more expressive sections, which
fall outside the scope of Markdown, such as the red quotations blocks
that permeate TVB, can be handled within Markdown, by adding HTML
snippets, which will easily do the job.

The big downside of this approach is that it leaves one at the mercy of
the conversion software used. Although Pandoc is an incredibly powerful
piece of software, it is not perfect, as I am afraid no piece of
software is. Pandoc conversions, are sometimes, specially in very small
details, not exactly what one wishes. An example of this is the way
Pandoc handles footnote references in EPUB3 conversions. The conversion
presents superscript footnote reference numbers by wrapping the numbers
in HTML superscript tags ``, as in:

    squatters movement.2` tags are a simple means to
format text as superscript. Yet it goes against the [accessibility
guidelines](http://www.idpf.org/accessibility/guidelines/content/xhtml/notes.php)
from the International Digital Publishing Forum, which state “Do not use
the sup element to superscript note references, as it is redundant
presentational tagging. The CSS vertical-align property can be set to
superscript the a elements.” Furthermore, they compromise the
responsiveness of footnote references in the iPad’s iBooks reader. All
in all, it is understandable that such issue arises. EPUB3 specs are
still in development and Pandoc is an open-source project of small
dimensions, which probably has more pressing issues to tackle than to
make footnotes respond well on the iPad. Yet, one can do something about
it. The most obvious fix is to remove all the sup tags from the EPUB
once it is created (via a script). The other solutions are directly
related to the fact that Pandoc is Free/Open-Source software, licensed
under the [GNU General Public License version
2](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html). The license clearly states
that “You may modify your copy or copies of the Program or any portion
of it”, which means that anyone has the permission to modify Pandoc
source-code, and alter the way footnote references are encoded in EPUB3
conversions. Other possibility is to visit the [central
repository](http://github.com/jgm/pandoc) where the development of
Pandoc takes place and address this problem by [opening an
issue](http://github.com/jgm/pandoc/issues), which will be read
considered by Pandoc’s developers.

In a nutshell Makefiles are useful and simple ways to optimize the
development of an EPUB into recipes that can simplify the development of
an EPUB and make the most out of the combination of small, simple and
yet powerful pieces of software. However this approach isn’t perfect. It
isn’t a one-size-fits-all recipe that can be applied to the production
each and every EPUB, as it produces default behaviors and nearly
invisible artifacts that in some contexts can become disruptive.
Consequently the employment of other approaches and experimentation
remains essential to the innovation and diversification of ebooks.



# Developing EPUBster {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Marc de
Bruijn](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/marcdebruijn/ "Posts by Marc de Bruijn"),
November 19, 2014 at 3:26 pm.

![](imgs/epubster-04.png)

With *EPUBster* (for lack of a better name) we tried to develop a web
application allowing publishers to edit and create EPUBs. We us the term
‘publisher’ very loosely in this instance, also referring to developers,
designers or editors. *EPUBster* was partly developed for Amsterdam
based publisher Valiz and designers Meeus Ontwerpt in order for them to
create a series of books titled “Context Without Walls”. Their feedback
at various points prompted some of the design and implementation
decisions. As such the application is intended as a general purpose tool
for generating EPUBs, but incorporating some very specific features,
such as support for multiple indices.

The application can be broken down in a few components:

-   A very simple metadata editor offering just the necessary fields as
    defined in the EPUB standard;
-   Section or chapter editor, used for rearranging and deleting
    chapters in an EPUB;
-   Content editor allowing the user to manipulate the text of a
    section/chapter;
-   Options to add a book cover and CSS styling.

After creating an edition, filling in the required metadata and creating
some chapters, the user is then able to generate or preview an EPUB
based on the inputted data.

The same components used to build the application are represented in the
user interface. The interface allows the publisher to author a
publication step-by-step, from primary information and metadata input in
the first tab of EPUBster to adding a cover as the last step of the
process. To assist the user with the creation of a publication and
provide a flexible workflow, one can switch between tabs and components
of the application. This allows for a non-lineair workflow and the
possibility of adding chapters to a publication or change the design by
adding different CSS-files at a later stage.

## The Application

At the time we decided to build the application using a PHP framework,
*CakePHP*. Having developed multiple applications using the framework,
*CakePHP* proved to be a familiar environment allowing us to rapidly
prototype the features of the application. One of the downsides of
CakePHP is the slowness of the framework compared to other offerings and
the reliance on what’s often called “automagic” in Cake’s documentation.
As our recent experiences with the *Laravel* framework, partly built on
*Symfony*, have been very positive, the initial choice for *CakePHP* as
a foundation doesn’t seem as straightforward at this point.

One of the restrictions that guided the development process was the
requirement that the application should run on very common server
hardware. As a lot of webhosting environments are of the “shared
hosting” variety, making use of shell programs was out of the question.
It would be relatively simple to build a web GUI on top of *calibre*’s
command line interface or a document converter like *pandoc*. Instead we
relied on PHP libraries for most of the generative features of the web
application. Asbjorn Grandt’s
[*PHPePub*](https://github.com/Grandt/PHPePub) forms the core of the
application and was packaged, with some modifications, as a Cake plugin
in order to receive content from *EPUBster*’s MySQL database containing
the publication data.

At first we focussed on processing Markdown formatted text as input for
the various chapters/sections in a publication. After storing the
Markdown text in a database this is then converted to HTML and
subsequently processed by *PHPePub*. The conversion is done using the
[*Markdown Extra*](https://michelf.ca/projects/php-markdown/extra/)
library packaged as Cake plugin [by Maury M.
Marques](https://github.com/maurymmarques/markdown-cakephp).*WYSIWYG*
(What You See Is What You Get) orientated approach, while still
supporting Markdown. The *WYSIWYG* editor is an extended version of Davi
Ferreira’s [*Medium
Editor*](https://github.com/daviferreira/medium-editor). As the editor
manipulates HTML directly, no conversion is necessary prior to
generating an EPUB. Due to the fact that the editor uses HTML5’s
*contenteditable* behaviour there is support for parsing rich text
pasted from text editors and word processors. Bolds, italics, colours,
etc. will be pasted as HTML in a *contenteditable* element. This
introduces several problems however, as some word processors (notably
*Microsoft Word*) wrap formatted text in tags with a lot of style
attributes, resulting in a lot of undesirable and superfluous markup
when generating an EPUB. Stripping the unwanted markup (font-families,
line-height, etc.), while leaving the desirable elements (bold, italic,
etc.) in place took some modification of the *Medium Editor*’s codebase.

In earlier versions of the application it was only possible to preview a
draft edition by generating an EPUB, downloading the file to the user’s
harddrive and previewing said file in an ereader like *calibre* or
*iBooks*. To provide a more immediate way to preview draft editions we
decided to implement a JavaScript EPUB viewer. *ReadiumJS* seemed like a
natural choice, as the project is backed by several large publishers and
the *International Digital Publishing Forum*, the curators of the EPUB
standard. However at the time of implementation, *ReadiumJS* – which is
still in heavy development – proved to be too unstable for production
use. Instead we opted for
[*epub.js*](https://github.com/futurepress/epub.js/) by Fred Chasen, an
actively developed JavaScript library comparable to *ReadiumJS* which
offers a more robust experience. When a user previews an edition in
*EPUBster* an EPUB is generated on the fly and rendered in the browser
using *epub.js*.

The current version of *EPUBster* [is available on
GitHub](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/epubster). As it
stands the application should be considered of alpha quality and could
do with a lot more testing and polish. Testing of the EPUBs generated by
the application on several ereading devices should be a priority, for
example, should development on the application continue in some for or
other. However, it should currently be possible to create a
fully-fledged EPUB 3 without much trouble using the tools provided by
*EPUBster*.



![](imgs/epubster-02.png)
![](imgs/epubster-05.png)
![](imgs/epubster-07.png)
![](imgs/epubster-041.png)
![](imgs/epubster-06.png)
![](imgs/epubster-08.png)
![](imgs/epubster-03.png)





# Building My Highlights {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Marc de
Bruijn](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/marcdebruijn/ "Posts by Marc de Bruijn"),
November 19, 2014 at 3:28 pm.

![](imgs/highlights-01.png)

This is a short overview of the process of building a proof-of-concept
application. Requirements shifted during the development of the project
which, combined with a lot of uncertainty regarding the datasources to
be used, partly explains the technical exploratory process and the way
the final proof-of-concept was developed.

*My Highlights* was conceived as a mobile application allowing the user
to easily browse and filter a large collection of objects from
Highlights catalogue of the Stedelijk Museum. After the user selects
optional additional material (essay, interview, images, etc.) one is
able to generate an EPUB based on the selection, available for offline
use – for example on a smartphone while visiting the museum itself.

Apart from the technical development of the Highlights application, we
also designed the structure of the application and provided the basis of
the user interface in collaboration with Medamo. The application is
split into different sections, apart from the overview of a collection,
the application contains search, filters, guides and a section showing a
personal selection of content from the Highlights catalogue. All of the
sections are reached by selecting a series of four buttons contained in
a tabbar on the bottom of the screen. A common usage scenario involves
working from left to right in the tabbar, by first browsing the entirety
of the collection (the leftmost button), searching and filtering the
content (second and third button) and reviewing the selected choices in
the last section (available by selecting the button on the far right). A
basic interface design was developed based on the aforementioned
scenario and further developed and designed by Medamo.

In our day to day practice we mostly develop websites and site-specific
web-applications for use in exhibitions. Building native applications
for smartphones and tablets on multiple platforms (iOS, Android) is a
whole field entirely. There is the learning curve to consider for each
SDK, not to mention the difference in programming language (Objective-C
for iOS, Java for Android, etc.) and the breadth of devices to support.
Building an application using the Android SDK doesn’t guarantee it will
work on any given Android device and the same holds true to a lesser
extent when using iOS (though the device range is smaller). For
developers who work predominantly with web technologies this isn’t the
most straightforward method available, so at first we examined two
possible solutions; [*PhoneGap*](http://phonegap.com) and [*Sencha
Touch*](http://www.sencha.com/products/touch).

## PhoneGap

The promise of HTML5 web applications packaged as native apps is an
intriguing one, as it seemingly allows a web developer to ignore most of
the problems related to development using native SDKs. This is the
promise of *PhoneGap*, which gives a developer the tools to package an
HTML5 application and even – with some extra work – use some of the
native features of the targeted device (i.e. camera, compass, etc.) The
foundation of *PhoneGap* is [*Apache
Cordova*](http://cordova.apache.org) and it allows developers to package
HTML, JavaScript and CSS as native application binaries. In theory one
would create one application in HTML and use *PhoneGap* to generate all
the required application binaries based on that HTML master for the
platforms one wants to support. *Apache Cordova* also gives access to
device specific functions (camera, compass, accelerometer, etc.)
normally only available to applications built using the official SDKs.
Using *PhoneGap* a HTML application may interface with these services
through *Apache Cordova* in a unified way. As an example, the procedure
for accessing photo’s in the HTML context via *Apache Cordova* is
theoretically the same, whether the generated application binaries are
intended for distribution on an iPhone, Android or Windows phone or even
a Blackberry.*PhoneGap* in itself only offers the tools to create the
binaries, the actual application can be build using any client-side
application frameworks.

## Sencha Touch

*Sencha* offers a suite of tools, from a UI framework for building
mobile interfaces (*Sencha Touch*) to a JavaScript framework (*Ext JS*)
and an application (*Sencha Cmd*) which handles the packaging of the
code into native binaries. Due to the tight integration of the
individual components and the promise of speed rivaling that of native
applications Sencha appeared to be a viable solution at first sight. As
*Sencha Touch* is heavily integrated with *Ext JS* the learning curve is
quite high when unfamiliar with both frameworks. *Sencha* might have
been a viable option when developing a fully-fledged mobile application
to be deployed commercially, although many other competing options –
like *Ionic* – exist in that regard.

## jQuery Mobile

As the learning curve of *Sencha* proved to be a little too steep, we
turned to another HTML5 framework: [*jQuery
Mobile*](http://jquerymobile.com). As the name suggests the framework is
build on *jQuery* and therefore closely tied to the concepts used in
that particular library. *jQuery Mobile* mainly focuses on a consistent
UI experience on any platform (smartphone, tablet or desktop) and is
less (or not at all) concerned about speed or integration. Frameworks
like *Sencha* and [*Ionic*](http://ionicframework.com) try to mimic the
native UI widgets (lists, buttons, etc.) of each platform as close as
possible, while *jQuery Mobile* uses one style of widgets and aims at
rendering them as consistently as possible across multiple
platforms.*jQuery Mobile* is fairly easy and the integration with
*jQuery* certainly helps. However, for the *My Highlights* application a
custom design was created which didn’t really mesh with the default
widgets of the framework. Manipulating and overriding large portions the
framework’s CSS in order to support the design of the *My Highlights*
application, combined with the framework’s many quirks, conventions and
spotty documentation, made us abandon the framework after building a
portion of the application. *jQuery Mobile* offers a lot of options
which we didn’t necessarily need and the way some of the features have
been implemented were more of a hassle to support than actually speeding
up development.

## No specific framework

Ultimately we considered a more barebones scenario using only *jQuery*,
a library to handle URL routing ([*Flatiron
Director*](https://github.com/flatiron/director)) and a way to store
client-side data ([*jStorage*](https://github.com/andris9/jStorage)).
The application communicates with an external *WordPress* installation,
in lieu of a datasource like *Adlib*, in order to receive collection
data (via the newfangled [*WordPress JSON REST
API*](https://wordpress.org/plugins/json-rest-api/)) and generate an
EPUB based on the selections made in the *My Highlights* application.
This barebones setup, using only relatively small, individual JavaScript
libraries, allowed us to quickly develop a proof-of-concept application
which may be packaged as a *PhoneGap* binary or used as a web
application.

The code of the application and two WordPress plugins [are available on
GitHub](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/my-highlights).



![](imgs/highlights-01.png)
![](imgs/highlights-03.png)
![](imgs/highlights-04.png)
![](imgs/highlights-05.png)
![](imgs/highlights-06.png)
![](imgs/highlights-07.png)
![](imgs/highlights-08.png)
![](imgs/highlights-09.png)
![](imgs/highlights-10.png)





# How to Handle Corrections in a Hybrid Workflow {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Miriam
Rasch](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michael/ "Posts by Miriam Rasch"),
October 28, 2014 at 2:58 pm.

Read the introduction to [Hybrid workflow
how-to](http://digitalpublishingtoolkit.org/2014/10/hybrid-workflow-how-to-introduction-editing-steps/)
here.

Corrections form a large part of the process of making a book, whether
it is in print or electronic. Handling corrections posed one of the
biggest challenges to the INC research team and the ideal solution is
still not found. To start with the conclusions:

**Conclusion 1**: work towards a document as clean as possible before
sending it to the designer and developer because this saves a huge
amount of work (see also our post on the [style
guide](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/10/21/style-guide-for-hybrid-publishing/)).
This is mainly due to:

**Conclusion 2**: it seems impossible to avoid multiple work on
corrections, meaning both editor, designer, and developer might have to
put them through in their respective files.

**Conclusion 3**: not all corrections are relevant for all publication
formats; different kinds of corrections are made in different locations.
An example are hyphenations, which are specific to a desktop publishing
file, and do not play a role in a digital file.

**A little pre-history**

**Markdown**[workflow
how-to](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/10/07/hybrid-workflow-how-to-introduction-editing-steps/)).

**Types of corrections**

-   spelling mistakes
-   minor style issues
-   design issues: loose lines on top or bottom of the page,
    hyphenation, blank pages, white space between words, …
-   images: quality of the image, captions, placing of the images
    relative to the text
-   et cetera

Below is an example of a standard spread marked with editorial
corrections, including spelling, hyphenation, and design questions.

![Corrections\_INC-1WEB.jpg](imgs/xscmF2uSFUSO2xNmnm4xJybnSZhDUE4b5atDpVe1LFTVdosNB3rXHj3FXjEUHDWzI5k7AZLvZvR4_CVwUxUa7gF9QXSyvr8eK7CDyo7Dkhe9DiXWI05rykB09Cd7PQ-L0A)

**Place of corrections**

The corrections are usually marked by the editor and then issued to the
designer, who will process them in the InDesign file, and to the
developer who will do the same in the EPUB. Text corrections need to be
processed in both files in the same way. Design- or lay-out specific
corrections can be divided in desktop publishing corrections
(InDesign-only) and design and technology corrections in the EPUB. This
means a distinction has to be made. To return to the example of
hyphenation: an incorrect hyphenations is specifically a problem of the
desktop publishing file and needs to be manually adapted there, while
playing no role in the HTML file. The same goes for white spaces that
are too big or small; or the other way around, for links in the EPUB
that do not work, or headers which do not appear in the Table of
Contents.

**Archival file**

**Communicating corrections**



# Style Guide for Hybrid Publishing {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Miriam
Rasch](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michael/ "Posts by Miriam Rasch"),
October 21, 2014 at 10:47 am.

The pursuit of hybrid publishing – aiming at different output formats,
both print and electronic, for a single title – means reconsidering your
workflow from the first step to the last. A well thought-through style
guide is essential to make this transition to hybrid publishing
efficient, time- and money-wise. The style guide is sent to the authors
or contributors and defines how you receive your documents or
manuscripts. Adapting your style guide so it fits your hybrid publishing
goals beforehand will save a lot of time in production!

The Institute of Network Cultures has worked on the development of a
hybrid workflow, which is described in detail [on this
blog](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/10/07/hybrid-workflow-how-to-introduction-editing-steps/):
steps for the editor to follow, for the print book designer, and for the
ebook developer. In that manual we start from the point where the
definitive manuscript of the author is handed in and follow as it is
made into a InDesign/PDF document and an EPUB.

However, the workflow will without a doubt gain in efficiency when there
is attention paid to the nascent state of a publication as well: the
style guide used by a publishing house. In what follows the INC style
guide will be given as an example of how to adjust your publishing style
guide in such a way as to cater for a hybrid publishing workflow.

We’ll focus solely on the issues at stake in the transition to a
combined print and electronic workflow and will leave other elements of
the style guide aside. A copy of the style guide as used by the INC can
be downloaded
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/10/Styleguide_INC__2014.pdf).

INC books are published on paper, as PDF, and in print-on-demand and are
freely available from the INC website. For more information on INC
publications, visit
[networkcultures.org/publications](http://networkcultures.org/publications).

—

**Language style**

**Document Formatting / Layout:**

*General*- Submissions should be sent preferably in .docx.

*We chose this format because of the editing and rewriting that is still
going on in this phase. Therefore the author is not asked specifically
to hand in a markdown file (see also the blog post about corrections
(forthcoming)). Of course, if the author is apt at working in markdown,
this is possible.*

The following points are about the formatting of the Word
file:**Normal** style as default.**Heading 1** style, article sections
should have **Header 2** and subsections **Header 3** style.*italics*
where needed (references, emphasis on single words).

*The URLs will be made clickable in a later stadium so they function
correctly in the PDF and EPUB. URLs in the footnotes however should be
clickable.*

*Footnotes and referencing*- All references should be auto-inserted
footnotes (in other words, no in text references that use
parentheses/brackets). For example, *not:* Off the Press discusses the
question of digital publishing (Lorusso, 2013). *But*: Off the Press
discusses the question of digital publishing. All
references should also be collected into a Reference list at the end of
the article. Please do not use an automated reference list, or disable
the macro after you finish making it this way.[…]

*QuotationsBlockquotes will be marked with \> in markdown and should be
highly visible in the original document, so the conversion can be
checked easily*[…]

**Images:**- Authors must have copyright to the images, or permission to
use them.

**Word Choice:**Does not apply 

**Footnote and End
References:**Does not apply









# Hybrid workflow how-to: Making automated workflows, part 2 {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Michael
Murtaugh](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michaelmurtaugh/ "Posts by Michael Murtaugh"),
October 21, 2014 at 10:09 am.

As part of the [INC subgroup](http://networkcultures.org), we have been
developing a workflow that allows a flexible production of different
kinds of electronic outputs like EPUB, PDF, and [book
trailers](http://digitalpublishingtoolkit.org/2014/10/epub-trailers/)
from a sample collection of essays from the recently published [Society
of the Query](http://networkcultures.org/query/) Reader.

In part two of this tutorial, we create a shell script to compile
multiple [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/)
sources into a EPUB-format Reader using
[pandoc](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/). We then use a helper
script, expand-toc.py, to use a markdown-formatted table of contents to
order the contents of the EPUB. Finally, we create a
[makefile](http://digitalpublishingtoolkit.org/2014/10/make-book/) to
fully automate the build process, and add an [EPUB
trailer](http://digitalpublishingtoolkit.org/2014/10/epub-trailers/) as
an output.



This tutorial is targeted for developers or people interested in
creating automated workflows for producing EPUBs. It assumes basic
familiarity with a commandline interface (such as the Terminal
application on GNU/Linux or Mac OS X, or the command prompt in Windows).

## Prepare your workspace & tools

Unpack, checkout or copy the sample files from the [github
repository](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/Society-of-the-Query-Reader).
Open the Terminal and use the cd command to enter the "part2" folder in
the developer section of the how-to-tutorial files.

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
git clone https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/Society-of-the-Query-Reader.git

cd how-to-tutorial/developer/part2
```

## Use pandoc to tweak a markdown document to be combinable with others

Any filename given to pandoc on the commandline that is not preceded by
an option (such as -o) is considered an input. When you give pandoc
multiple input files, pandoc cuts and pastes the different texts
together as if they were coming from a single file. While this will
sometimes just work, it creates some specific problems for the essays
from the Society of the Query:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc -o reader.epub *.md
```

Produces a lot of warnings:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc: Duplicate note reference `3' "source" (line 1582, column 1)
pandoc: Duplicate note reference `2' "source" (line 1580, column 1)
pandoc: Duplicate note reference `1' "source" (line 1578, column 1)
```

This is because when treated as a single document, all the footnotes
(which use numeric indexes) from the different essays can no longer be
differentiated (reference 3 from which essay?).

Besides overlapping footnotes, there may be problems with the hierarchy
of the overall document. The individudal essays have been written with
their title as level 1, and sections within the essay as level 2. This
is fine, but for the final reader we may want to introduce higher level
sections (at level one) to for instance group the essays thematically.
In that case the essay levels should shift so that their title is level
2, and essay sections level 3. Luckily pandoc has an option to do just
that called –base-header-level that (re)sets the "topmost" level of a
document when outputting it.

In general, a useful technique is to use pandoc in two passes, first
individually on each essay to adjust it for compilation in the larger
document. Each altered essay is then pasted in a new master markdown
file containing the entire reader document and it is this file that is
converted (again by pandoc) to EPUB.

Try the following command:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc David_Crusoe.md --to markdown --id-prefix=David_Crusoe.md- --base-header-level 2
```

In the resulting markdown output, note the final Notes section:

``` {.sourceCode .markdown}
### Notes {#notes .notes}

[^David_Crusoe.md-1]: The Common Core references algebraic set theory in
    its high school appendices. See
    http://www.corestandards.org/assets/CCSSI\_Mathematics\_Appendix\_A.pdf
    for more information.

[^David_Crusoe.md-2]: Way Back Machine, 21 November 1996 archive of ‘How
    to Use Excite Search’,
    http://web.archive.org/web/19961219003220/http://www.excite.com/Info/advanced.html?aqt.

[^David_Crusoe.md-3]: Anthony Stuart, ‘Re: Boolean + Operator Removed?
    Why?’ posting to Google Search Forum, 5 November 2011,
    http://productforums.google.com/forum/\#!searchin/websearch/%22implied\$20and%22/websearch/3oIWbew9xdE/xuKBfNk5wjwJ.
```

First the "Notes" header has shifted from a level 2 to level 3. The
"–base-header-level 2" option basically shifts each level by one (in
other words what was 1 becomes 2, was 2 becomes 3 and so on).

Additionally, the footnote references now are preceded by the name of
the document (and pandoc has changed the matching references in the text
as well). This markdown will now combine well with other sources.

Next, let’s use a template (see essay-template01.md) to add a custom
header and format the authors names:

``` {.sourceCode .markdown}
# $title$ {.title}

&#172;
for(author)$
author$
endfor$

body$
for(include-after)$
include-after$
endfor$
```

Now putting it all together:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc David_Crusoe.md --to markdown --template essay-template-01.md --no-wrap --id-prefix=David_Crusoe.md- --base-header-level 2
```

*Devilish detail*: Note the use of the –no-wrap option. This disables
pandoc’s automatic text wrapping feature when outputting, in this case,
markdown. A subtle bug we discovered was that long titles were being
line wrapped which would then break the h2 header in the template (where
the *title* variable is expanded on a line
starting with \#\# so that only the first line was considered part of
the header). Thankfully this behaviour can be disabled with –no-wrap.

## Use pandoc to convert multiple markdown source files to an EPUB

Open the file build01.sh, it contains the following:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
#!/bin/bash

# blank the reader.md file
> reader.md

# process all the files listed in ESSAYS in a loop
# use >> to append each output to reader.md
for i in `cat ESSAYS`
do
pandoc "$i" \
    --to markdown \
    --template essay-template-01.md \
    --no-wrap \
    --id-prefix="${i}-" \
    >> reader.md

# ensure a blank line at the end of each essay
echo >> reader.md

done

# Make the EPUB from reader.md
pandoc \
    --epub-chapter-level=1 \
    --toc-depth=1 \
    -o reader.epub \
    reader.md
```

Run the build01 script by typing:

    bash build01.sh

*Devilish detail*: When combining all the markdown into a single
document, all the footnotes would be merged together and displayed in
one large section at the end of the EPUB. A crucial pandoc feature is
the –epub-chapter-level option which in addition to splitting the source
(back) into separate files (which makes the document lighter for an
e-reader), it also puts footnotes back into each individual essay.

## Using a Table of Contents to order the EPUB

In the step above, the names and order of the essays added to the EPUB
output is set by using a simple text file (named ESSAYS).

For the INC workflow, we created a custom script (expand-toc.py) that
allows a table of contents file written in markdown format to order the
contents of the EPUB. The script expects the name of a table of contents
file containing (markdown formatted) links to the essays in the order
they should appear.

As an additional feature, the table of contents itself is output first
allowing a customized table of contents display beyond the automatic
table of contents feature of pandoc. To do this, the script remaps the
links to the first id found in the linked-to file; for this reason it’s
important that the individual files (or at least their filtered output,
see below) begin with a unique heading.

To customize the output of each file to include alterations developed in
the previous step (such as patching the footnotes & using a custom
template), the expand\_toc script has a –filter option that should point
to a bash script that receives the input filename as the first parameter
and which should output to *stdout*.

Finally, expand-toc.py has a –section-pages option that outputs separate
pages for each section header in the table of contents.

Open the file essay.sh, it should contain the following:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
#!/bin/bash

pandoc \
    --to markdown \
    --template essay-template-02.md \
    --no-wrap \
    --base-header-level 2 \
    --id-prefix=$1- \
    $1
```

Make sure to make this script is executable:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
chmod +x essay.sh
```

Now you can use the expand\_toc script to create the compiled reader.md
document:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
scripts/expand_toc.py toc.md --filter ./essay.sh --section-pages > reader.md
```

And convert this into an EPUB:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc --self-contained --epub-chapter-level=2 --toc-depth=2 -o reader.epub reader.md
```

## Installing make

The GNU *make* utility is a program that can help orchestrate your build
scripts. See the [related blog post on how make has been used in the INC
subgroup](http://digitalpublishingtoolkit.org/2014/10/make-book/).

Mac: One way to install make is to install Apple’s XCode development
tools. This is either available on your Mac’s original system discs, via
the Apple App store, or via the Apple developers website. On recent
systems, you can simply open the Terminal (in Applications/Utilities)
and type:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
make
```

A message should then tell you how to install the program. If make is
correctly installed you will see the message:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
make: *** No targets specified and no makefile found.  Stop.
```

Ubuntu:

You may need to install the "build-essentials" package:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
sudo apt-get install build-essentials
```

Debian:

Make is likely already installed, try running it from the commandline.

## Create a makefile

A *Makefile* can be seen as a kind of [executable
notebook](http://zgp.org/static/scale12x/) that helps organize ad hoc
build scripts into a format that understands how the pieces fit together
as *targets* and *dependencies*.

Open the file *makefile*, it contains the following:

``` {.sourceCode .makefile}
sources=$(shell scripts/expand_toc.py --list toc.md)

all: reader.epub

reader.md: toc.md $(sources)
    scripts/expand_toc.py toc.md --filter ./essay.sh --section-pages > reader.md

reader.epub: reader.md styles.css metadata.xml
    pandoc \
        --self-contained \
        --epub-chapter-level=2 \
        --epub-stylesheet styles.css \
        --epub-metadata metadata.xml \
        --toc-depth=2 \
        -o reader.epub \
        reader.md
```

*Devlish detail*: The indented lines of a makefile *must* use the tab
character (and not spaces). In SublimeText, you can select text to "show
invisibles". You should see the long unbroken dash of a tab character
before each command. Be careful when cutting and pasting code into a
makefile that no spaces get introduced or make will starting
inexplicably complaining.

Note how the two command lines from the build02.sh script have been
turned into rules of the form:

``` {.sourceCode .makefile}
target: dependencies 
    command(s) to build the target
```

To use the makefile, simple type:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
make
```

To trigger the build process. By default the all script will build
creating first the reader.md, and then reader.epub.

In the first line, the expand\_toc.py script’s –list option is used to
produce the list of markdown sources in a format (one file per line)
that is usable in the makefile. These sources are listed as a dependency
to *reader.md*. If you alter one of the linked to markdown sources,
*make* will know that it needs to rebuild first *reader.md* and then
*reader.epub*. If you subsequently alter just the *styles.css* file,
however, only the final step will be repeated to update *reader.epub*.

## Add EPUB trailers as a target to the makefile

A major benefit to using a makefile is the ability to produce a number
of different outputs by creating multiple "targets" and rules based on
the same sources. In this case we use the [epubtrailer
script](http://digitalpublishingtoolkit.org/2014/10/epub-trailers/) to
take the epub resulting from pandoc, and create a GIF-format book
trailer.

To use the epubtrailer.py script, you will need the Python Image
Library, as well as the images2gif python library. If you have installed
the python package manager *pip*, you can install both with the command:

    sudo pip install PIL images2gif

Now add the following lines to the end of your makefile:

``` {.sourceCode .makefile}
reader-trailer.gif: reader.epub
    scripts/epubtrailer.py \
        --width 320 \
        --height 240 \
        -o reader-trailer.gif \
        reader.epub
```

As mentioned above (see *devlish detail*), make sure that you put an
actual single tab character before "scripts/epubtrailer.py" (cutting and
pasting from the web version will be using spaces!). Now type:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
make reader-trailer.gif
```



# Hybrid workflow how-to: Making automated workflows, part 1 {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Michael
Murtaugh](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michaelmurtaugh/ "Posts by Michael Murtaugh"),
October 21, 2014 at 11:53 am.

The first post in this series can be found here:[Hybrid workflow how-to:
introduction & editorial
steps](http://digitalpublishingtoolkit.org/2014/10/hybrid-workflow-how-to-introduction-editing-steps/)

As part of the [INC subgroup](http://networkcultures.org), we have been
developing a workflow that allows a flexible production of different
kinds of electronic outputs like EPUB, PDF, and [book
trailers](http://digitalpublishingtoolkit.org/2014/10/epub-trailers/)
from a sample collection of essays from the recently published [Society
of the Query](http://networkcultures.org/query/) Reader.

In part one of this tutorial, we look at using the
[pandoc](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/) tool on the command line to
convert a [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/)
source that has been edited by an editor into HTML and EPUB outputs. In
addition, we will add metadata and use pandoc templates and a stylesheet
to customize the output.



This tutorial is targeted for developers or people interested in
creating automated workflows for producing EPUBs. It assumes basic
familiarity with a commandline interface (such as the Terminal
application on GNU/Linux or Mac OS X, or the command prompt in Windows).
Introductions to the commandline such as the [Designers guide to the OS
X Command
Prompt](http://wiseheartdesign.com/articles/2010/11/12/the-designers-guide-to-the-osx-command-prompt/)
can be very useful if the commandline is still new to you.

## Install pandoc

Instructions for installing pandoc on Mac, Windows, and Linux are given
on the [pandoc
website](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/installing.html).

Mac: From the [download page](https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/releases),
find the green button with a link that ends with “osx.pkg”. Download and
install this.

Debian/Ubuntu: Pandoc is available from your package manager:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
sudo apt-get install pandoc
```

However, the version of pandoc is typically outdated. To compile the
latest and greatest, follow the instructions on the [pandoc
website](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/installing.html) under “All
platforms”. In a nutshell:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
sudo apt-get install haskell-platform
cabal update
cabal install pandoc
```

## Prepare your workspace & tools

Unpack, checkout or copy the sample files from the [github
repository](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/Society-of-the-Query-Reader).
Open the Terminal and use the cd command to enter the “part1″ folder in
the developer section of the how-to-tutorial files.

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
git clone https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/Society-of-the-Query-Reader.git

cd how-to-tutorial/developer/part1
```

As we will be working with different kinds of code (both markdown and
HTML output), it is quite important to have a good code editor to work
with. A code editor (as opposed to programs like “Simple Text” or
Microsoft Word) provides features like language-specific syntax coloring
and helpful keyboard shortcuts for say adding comments. Many code
editors exist from classical commandline editors like vi and emacs, to
graphical editors like gedit and [Sublime
Text](http://www.sublimetext.com/). Though not Free Software, [Sublime
Text](http://www.sublimetext.com/) is an excellent cross-platform code
editor with many advanced features, which is free of charge to use (in
Trial mode) indefinitely and a good example of the state of the art of
contemporary code editors in terms of features and usability.

## Use pandoc to convert a single markdown source file to HTML & EPUB

As you may have seen in Step 5 of the [Hybrid Workflow Howto for
Editors](http://digitalpublishingtoolkit.org/2014/10/hybrid-workflow-how-to-introduction-editing-steps/),
you can use the pandoc program to convert from one file format to
another (such as in that example from Word DOCX to Markdown). In this
step we use pandoc to convert an edited markdown file as it would arrive
from an editor into first HTML, and then to an EPUB.

Open the file Kylie-Jarett.md in your editor, it begins:

``` {.sourceCode .markdown}
# A Database of Intention?

Kylie Jarrett

In his 2005 study of Google, industry analyst John Battelle describes
the company’s technology as a ‘database of intentions’, ‘a massive
clickstream database of desires, needs, wants, and preferences that can
be discovered, subpoenaed, archived, tracked, and exploited for all
sorts of ends’.[^1]
```

In the terminal type the following. Note that once you type the K of the
filename you should be able to press the tab key to “auto-complete” the
name of the file:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc Kylie-Jarrett.md 
```

By default pandoc will attempt to guess the type of the input file based
on the file extension. In this case the “.md” means that pandoc assumes
Markdown input. By default pandoc produces HTML and prints it to the
terminal rather than saving it in a file. To save it to a file, you can
use pandoc’s -o option:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc Kylie-Jarrett.md -o test.html
```

You can also explicitly state input and output types with pandoc’s –from
and –to options. This can be useful if a filename misses a recognizable
extension:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc --from markdown --to html Kylie-Jarrett.md -o test.html
```

In general the order of the parameter doesn’t really matter, as long as
the options precede their values, so the following would be the same:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc -o test.html --to html --from markdown Kylie-Jarrett.md
```

Use a web browser to open the resulting file (test.html) and check the
output. It should appear as formatted HTML. However there are likely
some glitches in the text. This is because pandoc’s default HTML output
is merely a fragment, and not a complete HTML document, and some
information (such as the proper encoding of the text) is not included.
If you open test.html in your editor, you see that the file begins:

``` {.sourceCode .html}
<h1 id="a-database-of-intention">A Database of Intention?</h1>


```

Note that pandoc automatically assigns an id to the header. This is
useful when linking. Next, run pandoc again, this time adding the
–standalone (or -s) option:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc essays/Kylie-Jarrett.md --standalone -o test.html
```

If you reload test.html in the browser, you should see that the
character gliches are corrected. If you look at test.html in your
editor, you see it now begins:

``` {.sourceCode .html}
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="generator" content="pandoc" />
  
  code{white-space: pre;}
</head>
<body>
<h1 id="a-database-of-intention">A Database of Intention?</h1>

```

The output now contains a proper HTML doctype and head section with,
among other things a character set, which tells the browser to interpret
the text as encoded in the utf-8 standard (Browsers by default assume
the latin-1 character set when a document doesn’t state it’s encoding
which is why the characters were being misinterpreted in the fragment).

## Add metadata to your document

In the HTML output in the previous step, the title tag in the document
is left blank. Even though the title of the essay is in the document,
it’s a level one header, pandoc doesn’t make any assumptions that that
is a title. Pandoc supports adding “metadata” (data about the document
itself).

Add the following to the first lines of the file
“essays/Kylie\_Jarrett.md”:

``` {.sourceCode .yaml}
---
title: A Database of Intention?
author: Kylie Jarrett
---
```

Now repeat the pandoc command to update the test output:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc essays/Kylie-Jarrett.md --standalone -o test.html
```

The resulting document now looks like this:

``` {.sourceCode .html}
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="generator" content="pandoc" />
  <meta name="author" content="Kylie Jarrett" />
  A Database of Intention?
  code{white-space: pre;}
</head>
<body>

<h1 class="title">A Database of Intention?</h1>
<h2 class="author">Kylie Jarrett</h2>

<h1 id="a-database-of-intention">A Database of Intention?</h1>


<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  <meta name="generator" content="pandoc" />
  <meta name="author" content="Mél Hogan" />
  <meta name="author" content="M.E. Luka" />
  Polluted and Predictive, in 133 Words
  code{white-space: pre;}
</head>
```

## Customize your output with a template and a stylesheet

So how did pandoc know what to do with the title and author in your
metadata? It turns out that [pandoc has a collection of standard
templates](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/README.html#templates), or
for each output format, which it uses to produce its output.

To see pandoc’s template for producing HTML output, type the command:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc -D html
```

The output (in part) shows:

``` {.sourceCode .html}
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"$if(lang)$ lang="$lang$" xml:lang="$lang$"$endif$>
<head>
  
  <meta name="author" content="$author-meta$" />
endfor$
if(date-meta)$
  <meta name="date" content="$date-meta$" />
endif$
  $if(title-prefix)$$title-prefix$ - $endif$$pagetitle$
  
for(css)$
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="$css$" $if(html5)$$else$type="text/css" $endif$/>
endfor$
</head>
<body>

if(title)$

<h1 class="title">$title$</h1>
if(subtitle)$
<h1 class="subtitle">$subtitle$</h1>
endif$
for(author)$
<h2 class="author">$author$</h2>
endfor$
if(date)$
<h3 class="date">$date$</h3>
endif$

endif$
```

In the template, you can see that pandoc provides some sophisticated
tools like conditionals (if) and loops (for) to provide basic handling
for optional elements and lists author names. To customize this standard
template, make a copy of it named custom.html:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc -D html > custom.html
```

Open the custom.html and change the display of the title and author to:

``` {.sourceCode .html}
if(title)$

  <h1 class="title">$title$</h1>
  
    &#172;
    $for(author)$
    $author$
    $endfor$
  

endif$
```

You can also see in the template that pandoc provides a number of ways
of adding custom stylesheets. The easiest is to use the –css option. So
create a new file names “styles.css” with the following:

``` {.sourceCode .css}
body {
  font-family: sans-serif;
}
#header {
    text-align: center;
}
h1 {
  margin-bottom: 0;
}
.author {
  font-weight: bold;
}
```

And now bring it all together with:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc Kylie-Jarrett.md --standalone --template custom.html --css styles.css -o Kylie-Jarrett.html
```

## Produce an EPUB

You can easily [produce an EPUB from a markdown source with
pandoc](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/epub.html) by simply specifying
an EPUB extension to the output file. Note that the –standalone option
is implicit with an EPUB:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc Kylie-Jarrett.md -o Kylie-Jarrett.epub 
```

To specify custom CSS with an EPUB, use the –epub-stylesheet option:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc Kylie-Jarrett.md --epub-stylesheet styles.css -o Kylie-Jarrett.epub
```

Note that pandoc places an automatically generated table of contents as
the last page, to move this to the front use the –table-of-contents
option.

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
pandoc Kylie-Jarrett.md --epub-stylesheet styles.css -o Kylie-Jarrett.epub --table-of-contents
```

## Next time… {#next-time}

In part 2 of this tutorial, we will work on a script to compile a
collection of essays into a single Reader EPUB.



# A reading device with some character and soul please {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [haroldkonickx](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/haroldkonickx/ "Posts by haroldkonickx"),
October 14, 2014 at 4:01 pm.

Working in the field of digital media, designer and HVA lecturer Frank
Kloos regretfully admits his love for physical books. Nevertheless
he fantasizes about a reading device that is as good as or maybe even
better than the real thing.

 

![Video: http://vimeo.com/108371598](imgs/492038655_640.jpg)

[Frank Kloos on digital publishing: ‘Vooralsnog vind ik tablets
karakterloos.’](http://vimeo.com/108371598) from [network
cultures](http://vimeo.com/networkcultures) on
[Vimeo](https://vimeo.com).



# EPUB Trailers {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Michael
Murtaugh](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michaelmurtaugh/ "Posts by Michael Murtaugh"),
October 13, 2014 at 9:00 am.

![](imgs/trailer-In_Praise_of_Folly__Illustrated_with_Many_Curious_Cuts.gif)

![](imgs/trailer-Gullivers_Travels__Into_Several_Remote_Regions_of_the_World.gif)

![](imgs/trailer-Alices-Adventures-in-Wonderland.gif)

![](imgs/trailer-Flatland_A_Romance_of_Many_Dimensions_Illustrated.gif)

Results from the
[epubtrailer.py](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/epubtrailer.py)
script that converts EPUB files into GIF-format book trailers. The
script was originally written by Silvio Lorusso during the [Public
Library
hackathon](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/11/free-library-for-every-soul-hackaton-first-report/),
and is released as part of the results from the work of the [INC
subgroup](http://networkcultures.org). Here the script is applied to a
selection of illustrated public domain EPUB’s available on [Project
Gutenberg](http://www.gutenberg.org/).



Above the title: [The Divine Comedy by Dante,
Illustrated](http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/8799)



# Markdown to Indesign with Pandoc (via ICML) {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
October 8, 2014 at 5:37 pm.

![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2014-10-08-at-17.29.26.png)

![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2014-10-08-at-17.02.19.png)

As part of the hybrid workflow for the Institute of Network Cultures
developed by the INC subgroup, I started a collaboration with Italian
graphic designer [Roberto Arista](http://projects.robertoarista.it/) in
order to write and collect scripts that facilitate the process of
importing HTML into InDesign.

This [set of
scripts](https://github.com/roberto-arista/fromHTMLtoXML_InDesignFlavour)
pre-processes HTML files, preserving such entities like headers,
paragraphs, italics, footnotes, tables, images, etc. Some of these steps
are summarised
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/05/import-html-into-indesign-via-xml/).
The scripts do so by converting the HTML files into an InDesign-friendly
XML structure and employing its *Import XML* function.

While such procedure is pretty good at maintaining the underlying
structure of the text (Paragraph and Character Styles are almost
automatically generated), it still has some imperfections. For instance,
an InDesign script called
[ReFoot](http://www.indiscripts.com/post/2010/04/refoot-convert-markup-text-into-indesign-footnotes)
was modified to generate footnotes declared with a XML-compatible
markup. The problem is that footnotes’ inner styles (italic, bold) are
lost. At the same time, yet no solution is provided to keep images or at
least their position.

Since May 2014, [pandoc](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/), an
open-source ”universal document converter”, is able to produce outputs
as ICML files. [ICML files](http://www.fileinfo.com/extension/icml) are
generally managed by InCopy, Adobe’s own word processor meant to
integrate with Adobe InDesign.

One of the advantage of using pandoc to obtain ICML is the fact that no
intermediate format is needed – HTML in our previous procedure.
Therefore we can directly use our Markdown source files. Here’s the
syntax to convert one document:

    pandoc -s -f markdown -t icml -o my.icml my.md

-   **-s** option, which stands for “standalone”, produces output with
    an appropriate header and footer;
-   **-f** option, which stands for “from”, is followed by the source
    format;
-   **-t** option, which stands for “to”, is followed by the output
    format;
-   **-o** option, which stands for “output”, is followed by the output
    filename, **my.icml** in above example;
-   **my.md**, in the above example, is the source filename.

The generated ICML file is then imported into InDesign with
**File\>Place**. In order to test the output, I used [this
file](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/10/Astrid.icml_.zip),
derived from the [Society of the Query
Reader](http://networkcultures.org/blog/publication/society-of-the-query-reader-reflections-on-web-search/).

Both Paragraph Styles and Character Styles are automatically generated.

Here’s a tentative list of preserved entities:

-   bold;
-   italic;
-   blockquotes:
-   footnotes;
-   headers;
-   paragraphs;
-   tables;
-   lists.

In addition, a placeholder for each image is created.

In this sense, pandoc seems to provide a pretty robust conversion system
that straightforwardly connects the production and editing of Markdown
structured text and the design phase in the Adobe InDesign environment.



# Hybrid workflow how-to: introduction & editorial steps {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Miriam
Rasch](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michael/ "Posts by Miriam Rasch"),
October 7, 2014 at 2:57 pm.

The hybrid workflow described below is developed by the [Institute of
Network Cultures](http://networkcultures.org) within the Digital
Publishing Toolkit. The research into this workflow was aimed at making
the transition from a print-centered publication process towards a
digital and print (hybrid) publication process. We ask the question: how
to handle documents so publication on different platforms is possible?
This means we don’t go into appropriate styles of writing or ways of
designing epublications vis-à-vis paper books.

Creating a workflow that is both structured and flexible enough to cater
for the different choices made is a key step towards an efficient
electronic or hybrid publishing strategy. The hybrid workflow we propose
here is based on the need for publishing across different mediums, while
keeping the majority of the work process in-house instead of
outsourcing.

Instead of ‘adding’ the digital publication at the end of an existing
workflow, based on the printed book as end result as is often done by
publishers, the workflow should be adjusted and made efficient and
practical towards hybrid publishing in an earlier stage. From-scratch
development of each publication format is thus replaced by single
source, multi format publishing.

The old, ‘traditional’ workflow is centered around the paper book
production, which basically means that it is centered around an InDesign
file. This file or the PDF that goes to the printer is the final
document that can be archived. The new, ‘hybrid’ workflow, is centered
around the archive file in Markdown, which is used as the basis for
publications in different output formats. A Markdown-oriented workflow
is both easy to use and open to many possibilities.

This manual is divided into three parts, one for each ‘role’ in the book
production process: editor, print book designer, and ebook developer.
Below you’ll find the editorial steps – the first in the process. For
the print design and ebook development see the respective blogposts for
print book designer steps and ebook developer steps (to be published
shortly).

Please note that the description below starts at a point which in
reality is not the beginning of the publication trajectory, namely when
an author hands in the definitive manuscript – so after the editing and
rewriting process has been rounded off. Should the author already be
working in Markdown format, this will change the workflow. However, in
our experience manuscripts are mainly produced in Microsoft Word and
delivered in .doc or .docx.

NB: An important step preceding the publication trajectory lies in the
formulation of the in-house style guide, where authors and editors can
find the requirements for the manuscript. This style guide must be
adapted according to the hybrid workflow as an absolute start. This
issue will be taken up in another blogpost.

So how small edition, low budget publishing houses can implement the new
workflow is what we will turn to now.

## What is needed in preparation:

**1. Install Pandoc** ([installation
page](http://www.johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/installing.html)). Pandoc is
working in the so-called command line mode and not in a user interface
environment. Hence you can’t ‘open’ the program and don’t see an icon.

Windows: To start pandoc type cmd in the RUN (also called ‘search
programs and files’ in the start panel which can be found under the MS
window icon down in the toolbar), this will enable you to start the
command mode. You get a white/black window saying C:useryourusername\>.
There you type pandoc (enter) and the same line reappears, waiting for
pandoc input (see further below).

Mac: To use pandoc open the Terminal from your Utilities folder in your
Applications folder, or through the search bar in the top right of your
screen. Pandoc will be used to convert files in the steps below. *Note:
Pandoc does not work on older Mac operating systems*.

**2. Install a Markdown editor**. For Mac, use for example
[Mou](http://25.io/mou/) or [MacDown](http://macdown.uranusjr.com/); for
Windows, [MarkdownPad](http://markdownpad.com/).

*What is Markdown?* John Gruber, developer of Markdown, describes
Markdown on [his website](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/)
as follows: ‘Markdown allows you to write using an easy-to-read,
easy-to-write plain text format, then convert it to structurally valid
XHTML (or HTML).’ Markdown is a way to process plain, unformatted text
with human-readable formatting symbols. That means that Markdown doesn’t
use HTML style tags to format, such as \<b\> for bold or \ to
mark-up the author name, but rather \#, \* and \_.

## Notes on working in Terminal

-   Delete: If you like to delete parts of your text you need to use
    your cursor and backspace. It is not possible to select parts of the
    text and delete it nor can you move in the text by selecting a spot
    with your mouse.
-   Go back: you can go back to earlier commands with the up arrow
-   Refresh: Close window and open a new one
-   You know that your command worked if you do not get an error.

## Editorial steps

You receive a digital document containing the definitive manuscript from
an author. We’ll name this file Jane\_Writer\_def.doc.

STEP 1: Open the file in Microsoft Word.

STEP 2: Convert the document to docx-format by saving it as
Jane\_Writer\_def.docx.

STEP 3: Apply header styling in the Word-document. Use header 1 for
title and author, header 2 for section title, header 3 for level below,
et cetera. Header styling is found in the Toolbar of Microsoft Word
under ‘Styles’ – click on the icon and select the right style. Or go to
the menu and select ‘View’ and ‘Styles’ under Toolbox and work from the
pop-up panel.

STEP 4: Save.

STEP 5: Convert the docx to Markdown using pandoc (for an elaborate user
manual, see the [pandoc
website](http://www.johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/)):

-   Pandoc is a command-line tool. There is no graphic user interface.
    So, to use it, you’ll need to open a terminal window (see above).
-   Create a subfolder in your Documents folder called ‘pandoc-test’.
    For Windows, put this under C:usersyournamedocuments (in many cases
    this is the default directory). This is the folder where we’ll store
    and retrieve documents to be converted and which are made by pandoc.
-   Put the docx-document you want to convert in this folder called
    pandoc-test. In this case: Jane\_Writer\_def.docx.
-   Go to the terminal and type cd Documents. This means the terminal
    will ‘change directory’ to the Documents folder.
-   Now type cd pandoc-test. The terminal will change directory to the
    folder within the Documents folder called pandoc-test. Now you can
    work with the documents in there.
-   On Mac, type ls [l as in lima, referring to ‘list’], on Windows dir
    to get a list of files in the current folder. The
    Jane\_Writer\_def.docx should be listed.
-   To convert the file from docx to markdown, type the following into
    the terminal: pandoc Jane\_Writer\_def.docx -f docx -t
    markdown -s -o Jane\_Writer\_def.md
-   The filename Jane\_Writer\_def.docx tells pandoc which file to
    convert, -f docx -t markdown, so from docx to markdown. The -s
    option says to create a ‘standalone’ file, with a header and footer,
    not just a fragment. And the -o Jane\_Writer\_def.md says to put the
    output in a file named Jane\_Writer\_def.md. (Note: in Mac you can
    copy-paste the command, in Windows you can’t copy-paste.)
-   Check that the file was created by typing ls or dir again. You
    should see Jane\_Writer\_def.md.

STEP 6: Open the Markdown editor that you installed (Mou or
Markdownpad), navigate to the pandoc-test directory and open the file
you just created using pandoc, Jane\_Writer\_def.md. The file will now
be opened in the markdown editor. You see two panels. The left panel is
the markdown format which we use to work in, the right panel is the
rendering of the coded panel into a user-readable-form. (You can also
try to type ‘open Jane\_Writer\_def.md’ in the terminal to open the
file.)

STEP 7: Check the Markdown file after conversion: are the headers still
marked, is there no funny formatting in the text, are the blockquotes
and italics preserved, for example in the references?

STEP 8: We use a template document showing how the formatting should be
applied in a correct way and which metadata to add. The text can be
copied into this document template, the format adjusted where needed
(for instance title, author name, headings, references, notes, the table
and the image). Save the file as Jane\_Writer\_final.md by choosing
‘duplicate’.

STEP 9: Add metadata information. Below is an example of relevant
metadata used by the INC:

    #Metadata

    Pr-id: project
    P-id: publication series
    A-id: number within the series
    Type (formerly called Item): type of the item
    Book-type: anthology or monograph
    Anthology item: TOC, article, index etc.
    Item-id: unique no.
    Article-title: title of the article
    Article-status: submitted, under review, accepted
    Author: name(s) of author(s)
    Author-email: corresponding address
    Author-bio: about the author
    Abstract: short description of the article (100 words)
    Keywords: 50 keywords for search and indexing
    Rights: Creative Commons etc. 

STEP 12: Save the final Markdown file into an archive folder. This is
the document that can be send to the print designer and epub developer
to work with in the production of the print book and ebook.

## Images

Check format of the images: is the quality good enough for print? Scale
images to smaller size for e-book publication. Store the images and send
to designer and developer.

## Corrections

Corrections form a large part of the editor’s workflow. How to handle
them will be the subject of a separate blogpost.



# make book {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Michael
Murtaugh](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michaelmurtaugh/ "Posts by Michael Murtaugh"),
October 1, 2014 at 1:30 pm.

![](imgs/SotQreader-trailer.gif)

*Make* is a popular free software tool that helps programmers compile
their code into programs. Increasingly the tool is finding new uses in
publishing workflows to compile prose text into electronic formats like
epub and PDF. The INC subgroup has been using *make* in their hybrid
workflow to produce multiple formats of the [Society of Query
reader](http://networkcultures.org/blog/publication/society-of-the-query-reader-reflections-on-web-search/).
While not a “killer app” with a pretty graphical interface, *make*
represents a distillation of practice that suggests future tools for
creating flexible, editable workflows where tweaks and workarounds are
the norm.

**make software**

*Make* is the name of a software program close to the heart of the Free
software movement. When programmer Richard Stallman founded the GNU
(Gnu’s Not Unix) project in the 1980s it was in part an effort to
reclaim the fruits of his own labour, and this meant rebuilding the
essential tools that turn what he writes (computer code) into something
usable (a computer program). According to the [GNU
website](http://www.gnu.org/software/make/):

> GNU Make is a tool which controls the generation of executables and
> other non-source files of a program from the program’s source files.

Free software is distributed as a collection of *source* files, text
files of computer code, that typically need to be *compiled* into
something usable (executable) in a particular situation. In Free
software, heterogeneous beast that it is, there is typically *no single
way* to make such a translation happen. And that’s a good thing. Free
software is designed to work in a variety of situations of use both
technically and socially determined. A software may need to run on
different computer hardware or operating systems, and programs often are
structured in a modular fashion to allow a user to pick and choose which
components she or he needs. As a result, this translation, typically
called the *build* process, can be in programmers parlance,
*non-trivial*.

For this reason, free software has historically been distributed with
additional programs, known as a make or build scripts, that make it
easier for someone to actually use it. After generations, this practice
was itself codified in a piece of software, *make*, a distillation of
the common patterns employed in the writing of these scripts. Using
*make*, the programmer writes a *makefile* that concisely describes the
steps necessary for each piece of the process (known as rules) and how
the pieces fit together (known as dependencies). In this process outputs
are named, known as *targets*. *Make* inherently supports multiple
targets allowing a software to be built in a number of ways to produce
different outputs. Once the *makefile* is written, a user just specifies
a target and *make* performs all the steps necessary, in the right
order, to produce the result. When source files are edited, make is
clever about only performing the steps necessary given what has changed.

## make epub; make webpages; make trailer

Crucially *make* does not itself do anything particular to the
compilation of code — the details are left to the specifics of each
rule. In this way more like a manager that delegates the “actual” work
of *making* to others. As the phrase *other non-source files*, obliquely
suggests *make* can in fact be used to produce more than just computer
programs. Increasingly, coders have been realizing the value of using
make outside of the context of code and started applying it to *regular*
texts. In a [recent presentation at a Linux users
event](https://www.socallinuxexpo.org/scale12x/presentations/git-and-make-not-just-code),
programmer Don Marti described *make* as an “executable notebook” to
create e-books in the epub format in a workflow based on *make* along
with other tools such as [git](http://git-scm.com/),
[markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/), and
[pandoc](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/). In his talk he describes
strategies for elegantly incorporating source files in DOCX (Word)
format, and managing distributed writing among a team, all without a
central server or “CMS”-centric paradigm.

The tools described in Marti’s presentation strongly echo the tools we
have been experimenting with in the INC subgroup. We have been using
*make* to produce electronic publications of the Society of the Query
reader. In our case a makefile is used to produce a variety of outputs
from the same markdown sources:
[epub](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/Society-of-the-Query-Reader/blob/master/build/SotQreader.epub),
web pages, [a GIF-format book
trailer](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/Society-of-the-Query-Reader/blob/master/build/SotQreader-trailer.gif),
and a (preview)
[PDF](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/Society-of-the-Query-Reader/blob/master/build/SotQreader.pdf).
In addition, we have been [investigating how to bridge to a designer
producing a layout in a program like
InDesign](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/05/import-html-into-indesign-via-xml/).
The [latest version of the
makefile](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/Society-of-the-Query-Reader/blob/master/makefile)
is posted on the [project’s online code
repository](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/Society-of-the-Query-Reader).

Beyond just supporting multiple outputs from the same sources, what’s
really significant about using a *make* in a publishing workflow is that
it makes the various steps of a workflow explicit, including various
“workarounds” and patches. By concisely describing all the steps for a
particular production, the *makefile* becomes a legible and crucially
*editable* snapshot of the workflow. Makefiles provide a flexibility and
re-editability that means that as the needs of a project change and as
tools and formats develop, the workflow remains adaptable. Of course,
there are many problems with makefiles: the format, though concise, is
technically challenging and often obscure. Also, *make* is typically
used from the command line, a way of working that is alien and
intimidating to many non-programmers. Still, the solutions that *make*
offers to a host of non-trivial problems is at the very least suggestive
of the kinds of features future tools for hybrid publishing would
ideally provide.

**Links**

-   [Nathan Willis’ post on LWN](http://lwn.net/Articles/589196/), where
    I originally read out about Marti’s presentation
-   [Don Marti presentation at
    SCALE](https://www.socallinuxexpo.org/scale12x/presentations/git-and-make-not-just-code)
-   [Don Marti slides](http://zgp.org/static/scale12x/)
-   [GNU Make](http://www.gnu.org/software/make/) the official project
    homepage



# Florian Cramer on “The Art of Hybrid Publishing” {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [margreet
riphagen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/arjen/ "Posts by margreet riphagen"),
October 1, 2014 at 5:11 pm.

Source: [Hybrid Publishing
Lab](http://hybridpublishing.org/2014/09/florian-cramer-on-the-art-of-hybrid-publishing/)



[Julia
Rehfeldt](http://hybridpublishing.org/author/juliarehfeldt/ "Julia Rehfeldt") — 
September 29, 2014 — [Leave a
comment](http://hybridpublishing.org/2014/09/florian-cramer-on-the-art-of-hybrid-publishing/#respond "Comment on Florian Cramer on “The Art of Hybrid Publishing”")


![](imgs/fCramer-e1412002165632.jpg)Florian Cramer is an applied
research professor and director of Creating 010, the research centre
affiliated to Willem de Kooning Academy and Piet Zwart Institute at the
Rotterdam University of Applied Sciences in the Netherlands. He also
works for WORM, a Rotterdam-based venue for DIY avant-garde culture.

**Hybrid Publishing Lab**: What recent changes do you see within the
intersection of DIY culture and hybrid publishing?

**Florian Cramer**: My colleagues Alessandro Ludovico and Silvio Lorusso
would be the better people to ask because they’re much more in touch
with contemporary practices and projects in this particular area. What I
generally observe is that hardcore DIY publishers go back to print,
particularly DIY printmaking including stencil presses, Risographs and
silk screening. Experimental hybrid digital/analog publishing seems to
be a domain mostly of graphic designers – which no longer means DIY in
the narrow sense of the word.

**HPL**: You developed a toolkit for publishers, can you briefly explain
the focus of this project to our readers?



**Cramer: **It’s not only for publishers, but also for designers,
authors and editors. The focus is (a) on e-books and e-book technology,
(b) on publishing in the arts, which encompasses everything from theory
books to artists’ experimental publications but in most cases means
visually oriented publishing. We found that in the field of the arts,
there is hardly any existing e-publishing know-how. Yet publishers feel
a great urgency to switch from pure paper publishing to hybrid paper and
electronic publishing for a whole number of reasons: costs, distribution
and outreach, but also new opportunities provided by the electronic
publishing; even if they just boil down to a museum offering, instead of
one heavy exhibition catalogue, customized e-books with a number of
works selected by the individual buyer, or to a publisher selling single
poems instead of a poetry volume.

Our toolkit consists of a handbook that gives everyone, regardless their
level of previous knowledge, a step-by-step technical and editorial
introduction into publishing electronic books. It is meant for small
publishers who cannot simply outsource such work to external agencies
and focuses on new editorial workflows that make it easier to
simultaneously publish in different media (such as paper book, e-book,
web site). The handbook covers different typical publication scenarios.
Next to this handbook, our Toolkit includes a number of self-written
software utilities. Very likely, it will also provide a user-friendly
interface for command-line Open Source software that we recommend as a
hybrid publishing document processing tool.

The development of this toolkit partly needs to be understood from a
Dutch cultural context where Gert Lovink and me work as applied research
professors in the system of higher polytechnic education and therefore
do hands-on R&D in collaboration with publishers and designers. There is
a major crisis of arts publishers in the Netherlands because most of
them depended (directly or indirectly) on public arts funding; funding
that has recently been slashed by the government. This urges everyone to
radically rethink the way they work. Obviously, electronic publishing is
not a panacea. Hybrid publishing can even make things more complicated
and, in the worst case, more expensive. So we’re looking for pragmatic,
working solutions – not snazzy design show-off work that may create
wow-effects but will not be a workable model for real life, in an area
of publishing where books rarely have editions of more than a few
hundred or few thousand. Focus on showcase projects has been the
achilles heel of all electronic and multimedia publishing efforts ever
since the CD-ROM in the 1990s.

We eventually want to take our project beyond the Dutch context and
continue our critical R&D in a wider European context. But the toolkit
will be published in English and, by the way of eating our own dog food,
made available in different digital and analog formats.

**HPL**: What was your experience when developing it?

**Cramer: **We greatly underestimated how little publishers are familiar
with computer technology outside the established Microsoft/Adobe
toolchain, and what a culture shock it was for them to be confronted
with new workflows that have their origin in Open Source, scientific
publishing and the World Wide Web (such as, for example, a simplified
markup language like Markdown). Many designers, publishers and editors
hope that hybrid publishing is an issue that could simply be resolved
with an additional export button in InDesign, but this is and will never
be the case. We also saw that other comparable projects, often initiated
by artists, designers or media researchers, started with bold promises
but failed to deliver because they had either underestimated the
complexity of the matter, or constrained themselves to solutions that
only work on one particular technological platform (such as Apples
iPad).

**HPL**: Which book will you always have as an analogue copy in your
bookshelf?

**Cramer: **Obviously, George Maciunas’ “Flux Paper Events” (published
by Edition Hundertmark in 1976). And, by, implication, all artists’
books, bookworks, design books and visual books for which the medium of
paper and the form of the bound codex is indispensable. – On the other
hand, I wouldn’t mind getting rid of thousands of conventional paperback
and hardcover text books in my home library and replace them with
electronic books, for the pragmatic sake of gaining space, and always
having my library with me as searchable files on one USB stick; despite
the obvious usability and durability advantages of paper books.

As a matter of fact, the question of analog vs. digital publishing is
not one of mutual excluding alternatives; it’s not about “either/or” (as
most of the publishing industry still believes) but about “and-and”.
This is why our toolkit isn’t called “electronic publishing toolkit” but
“hybrid publishing toolkit”. For the same reasons, I’m convinced that
we’re living in post-digital times where analog and digital coexist, and
get hybridized. Just like true music lovers own their music both in
digital and analog form, on vinyl \*and\* as mp3 files, I would advise
publishers to target book lovers who want their reading material on
paper \*and\* as an epub or PDF file. This could, btw., be good
business, too.

Our upcoming Conference on Publishing between Open Access, Piracy and
Public Spheres is up for [registration
now](http://www.postdigitalscholar.org/). You can read all
Interviews [here](http://hybridpublishing.org/tags/pdc14intro/).

Read tomorrow the introduction interview with Gary Hall, co-founder of
the open access journal Culture Machine, and co-founder of Open
Humanities Press.





# From print to what? {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
September 25, 2014 at 4:39 pm.

## Changing work patterns in electronic publications

The Toolkit project aims to assist smaller publishers in the art and
design sector to make their first steps in producing their books and
periodical through digital means. This aim turns out to demand a fairly
complicated road to final success. First of all, changing over from
print on paper to digital media is not the same as, say, changing from
an old-fashioned manual typewriter to an electronic typewriter. The
change implies a rethinking of the whole production process from author
to reader.

The first and most important new feature is that we lose the fixed page
as a pivotal reference. In paper production, we can, in principle,
change the book formats at will, but we are completely accustomed to a
very limited number of book formats. This fact is not a plot or ruse,
but the result of centuries of experience with readability,
manufacturability, portability and ease of use.

Unfortunately, we cannot transpose all our current experience and
knowledge about typography and layout, lock – stock – and – barrel, to a
digital environment. The sizes of reading screens are not standardized,
and, even worse, we can easily flip from a vertical page to a horizontal
page, with all the accompanying, associated layout problems such as the
position of illustrations in the text and the lengths of sentences.
Readers can change the type size and even the font at will, which
severely constrains the layout freedom of the designer and, most
frighteningly, not every electronic reading device allows for the same
presentation, as soon as we go beyond the simple text with the odd
illustration.

Hence, the toolkit project strives to find common ground based on the
most general but standardized and reusable techniques we have today. The
project doesn’t want to show what is possible in principle and how
wonderful the future will be, but to help the smaller publisher who
wants to team up in the digital storm to produce decent electronic
versions of their list. In our endeavour, we opted for the open source
EPUB3 format as end product of the production chain. At present, it is
the most versatile standard and as it is well-structured, we assume that
it will become translatable into newer, more powerful, standards in the
future. EPUB3 is already an accepted standard for novels, which makes it
a good basis for our Toolkit.

***Who wants more, or more precisely, who wants what?***In discussions
with smaller publishers, and in particular, with our partners in this
project, it became clear that the background, traditions, demands and
vistas are all quite different. These differences are a result of the
level of use of and love for new technologies and approaches as well as
the character of the publications themselves. A well-composed arts book
with good lay-out by an artist her/himself is a *pièce d’art*in itself
and, e.g., the format of the book, is part of the whole concept of the
product. It goes without saying that we can reproduce such a book in any
format, like making a postcard from Rembrandt’s Night Watch, but this is
not the same thing as the creation of a digitally-born novel book type.

Thus, in order to cater for various demands from various publishers, we
must make a distinction between categories of approach.

\(i) The first category is the publishing house itself that simply wants
their book to be readable on a standard ereader or tablet without
frills, just as we see novels being easily transposed from paper to
various screens. In this case, the most important issue is that the text
and the illustrations are kept together and that the lay-out, as far as
possible, remains the same. In this case, we have two options: do we
freeze the page in PDF-format, which allows the presentation of the
PDF-version into any available media, or do we translate the pages, as
they are, into a simple EPUB version that allows for so-called
reflowable text on an e-reader or tablet. Nothing more, nothing less. In
this case, digital publishing is just the next step in the existing
traditional product chain.

\(ii) The second line of attack is to step into the cold waters of the
endless digital data sea and try to start from a digital approach in
order to be able to publish a variety of publications based on a
base-set of author-created texts and illustrations. Print on paper will
be one outcome, but this is not the starting point. Here, we have to
rethink the production process and redefine our production chain; as
well as that; we have to look more carefully into the instructions to
our authors, as they will also need to change their habits by changing
to new electronic writing aids.

\(iii) The final category is the extension of the previous one, namely
the conversion into a real database of texts, illustrations and
multimedia objects from which a myriad of different products can be
created, depending on demand, technological environment, level of
complication, etc. Such a modular, Lego-block-like, structure demands a
developed understanding of what a base- brick of information is, and to
what extent the integrity of the flow of the author’s reasoning and
intention is kept.

***Workflow***Obviously, a publisher is not always familiar yet with
what can be done in principle and what the market is demanding. A
multitude of software acronyms representing at least so many software
products and/or protocols blows in the wind like autumn leaves. The
claims are sky-high and therefor become impenetrable for most smaller
publishers.

For these reasons in our Toolkit project, we start from simple standard
wordprocessor files, which we clean from unnecessary embellishments and
subsequently structure them to the extent defined by the demands of the
end product, such as levels of headings, footnotes, illustrations,
active objects, etc. From the structured files, we enable the publishers
to translate their works into EPUB3, as basis for a publication on a
digital device screen, as well as for the possible translation into a
web-page or a printed product.

The old saying in the computer industry “garbage in, garbage out” is
true here as well. For this reason, publishers must get accustomed to
instructing their authors in such a way that the translation chain from
manuscript to reading device is easy and transparent. Only if the
publisher herself understands the new workflow, can the author
understand how to submit work in such a way that the maximum of
publication outlets can be reached without any too heavy editing.

Our Toolkit enables the user to start from old-fashioned MSWord files
and following the correct procedures to see the light of the tablets and
ereaders allowing reading well-designed pages which are fit for re-use
and multiple use, without much further ado.



# Save the date, Showcases Digital Publishing Toolkit, 28th of November 2014 {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [margreet
riphagen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/arjen/ "Posts by margreet riphagen"),
September 22, 2014 at 6:58 pm.

![](imgs/flyer_A5_final_web_back.png)

![](imgs/flyer_A5_final_web_front.png)

Het Instituut voor Netwerkcultuur presenteert: Het ABC van Digitaal
Publiceren\_



# INC project update: Hybrid Publishing Workflow test {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
September 17, 2014 at 2:19 pm.

![](imgs/IMG_2544.jpg)

![](imgs/IMG_2534.jpg)

![](imgs/IMG_2541.jpg)

On the 12th of September the Institute of Network Cultures subgroup
organized a meeting to test  the initial results of their research.
Their project focuses on optimalising the publishing workflow for print
and electronic publications – developing a “hybrid publishing workflow”
that will make it easier and more sufficient to publish for several
platforms and formats. For this purpose they have researched and
developed several tools, and created manuals and visualisations that
will make this process accessible for a larger audience.

During the test day the tools and manuals were tested by several people
that each represented a certain role in this workflow: editor, designer,
and developer. Thanks to Andre Castro (developer and designer), Gert-Jan
van Dijk (Uitgeverij Duizend & Een) and his multimedia designer James
Fitzpatrick (Machined Arts Amsterdam), Menno Grootveld (Leesmagazijn),
Geert Lovink (INC), Margreet Riphagen (INC), and Caspar Treijtel (UvA,
University Library) we gained insights in the parts that still need to
be developed further. The results of this test day will be implemented
and published on the blog as soon as possible.

The results of this test day will be implemented, and published on the
blog as soon as possible!



# Wanted: intern with interest in e-books and digital publishing {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Miriam
Rasch](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michael/ "Posts by Miriam Rasch"),
September 4, 2014 at 2:25 pm.

For the further development of its electronic publication strategy –
combining digital and print books and other media – the Institute of
Network Cultures is looking for an

**Intern with a strong interest in digital publishing**3-6 months, 4
days a week, starting January 2015

You will be producing international publications in the field of online
media in different formats (print, PDF, epub). A strong command of the
English language in reading and writing is necessary, as most of the
publications are in English. We are looking for someone with a keen
interest or background in new media, writing & editing and/or the book
industry. It is possible to do research for a thesis within this
internship.

The Institute of Network Cultures (INC) is a media research center that
actively contributes to the field of network cultures through research,
events, publications, and online dialogue. The INC was founded in 2004
by media theorist Geert Lovink as part of the Amsterdam University of
Applied Sciences (Hogeschool van Amsterdam). The institute acts as a
framework sustaining several research projects, conferences, meetings,
with a strong focus on publications. For more information see
<http://networkcultures.org/>. For an overview of all INC publications
go to <http://networkcultures.org/publications>.

We are looking for an enthusiastic, energetic, inquisitive and precise
(former) student with a demonstrated interest in the field of digital
publishing and a desire to learn about books, e-books, and new media. In
addition, you have strong writing and communication skills. Knowledge of
WordPress, html, and social media management is a plus.

**Internship duties include:**

• Digitizing existing publications;

The intern will be a part of a small team within a large institution.
Other tasks within the team may include:

• Attending meetings;

**We offer:**

• The opportunity to be part of a dedicated, informal, and inspirational
organization with extended international networks;

For further information you can contact Miriam Rasch, publications
manager at <miriam@networkcultures.org> or +31 (0)20 5951865.

Applications: if you are interested please send your resume and cover
letter to <miriam@networkcultures.org> before November 1st 2014.



# Announcement: The Post-Digital Scholar Conference {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [margreet
riphagen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/arjen/ "Posts by margreet riphagen"),
September 3, 2014 at 2:40 pm.

Publishing between Open Access, Piracy and Public Spheres

12.11. – 14.11.2014 | Lüneburg, Germany

New media is dead! Long live new media! For three days, publishers,
researchers, programmers, designers, artists, and entrepreneurs will
discuss how research and publishing in the humanities have changed over
the past decade. The conference will explore new tools for gathering
knowledge, examine platforms for multimedia publishing, or collaborative
writing experiments.

Participants will focus on the interplay between pixels and print, and
discuss open and closed modes of knowledge, in order to seek out what
this elusive thing could be: post-digital knowledge.

Please register
[here](http://www.eventbrite.com/e/post-digital-scholar-conference-tickets-12164806263),
participation is free of charge. This website will keep you updated and
you can download the conference poster
[here](http://www.eventbrite.com/e/post-digital-scholar-conference-tickets-12164806263).

The Program of the “The Postdigital Scholar Conference” is chaired by:

Mercedes Bunz – Head of Hybrid Publishing Lab



# John Haltiwanger: Free Your Objects (And Let The Subject Follow) {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [irina](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/irina/ "Posts by irina"),
June 10, 2014 at 12:37 pm.

![](imgs/John-Haltiwinger-photo.jpg)

*A post by Mathijs Weijers*

John Haltiwanger was the third speaker of session 2, which focused on
publishing workflows, tools and platforms.

His talk aimed to give the audience a better understanding of the recent
work of [Gilbert
Simondon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gilbert_Simondon)![](imgs/favicon.ico)
on cybernetics theory. Simonodon’s work shines a new perspective on
[Norbert
Wiener’](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norbert_Wiener)![](imgs/favicon.ico)s
theory of cybernetics, originally published in 1948, but it is often
hard to grasp by readers. Hence, Haltiwanger wanted to offer the
audience a clear analysis of the essential terms of Simondon’s
vocabulary on cybernetics.

Haltiwanger warned that he is not an academic, and that he became
interested in the topic when doing his master’s thesis in New Media and
Digital Culture at University of Amsterdam: “I had to make a decision
about the format the thesis should be published in: PDF, HTML or .doc?”.
Choosing the right format seems to be very easy but actually can be
problematic, as each has its own specificity. PDF might have a clean
interface but it’s hard to archive and be read by machines – HTML
would do that job better. Word Documents are, in his opinion, standard
formats that are required in the academic environment but have little
benefits and reduced usability. There is furthermore the issue of
proprietary formats. While he used the open-source Libre software to
write his thesis, when exporting to PDF it crashed. These
inconsistencies are harmful as “knowledge is too important to be locked
in proprietary tools”. Thus, the thesis topic soon revolved around the
very format that academic publications can take, Haltiwanger joked. Yet,
this is why he believes that understanding the vocabulary for discussing
the cybernetics theory of Simondon is important, as users are forced to
simplify or even weaken the content of what they are working on in order
to get a desired format. Whilst there are so many format options,
Haltiwanger argued, “we are constrained by liberty”.



Haltiwanger explained Simondon’s cybernetics theory by a couple of
terms. The first one is *medium specificity.* Its official definition
is: “1. the fact, condition, or quality of being specific. 2 the quality
of being specific to a particular organism”. In the context of
publishing, a book and a Kindle have different specificities: the Kindle
is built with cheap labour and needs a charger, the book needs trees as
primary material and a shelf to be placed on. Knowing this, how should
an academic paper look like? PDF, HTML or Word?

The next term is *metastability.* To explain this definition,
Haltiwanger used a picture of an iceberg. An iceberg affects its
environment but the environment also shapes the iceberg – it’s a dynamic
progress. This metastability is taking place in the digital age as well.
There are components that influence each other, hence digital objects
will be different tomorrow.

The third term is t*ransduction*, defined by Simodon as follows:

> “An operation–physical, biological, mental, social–by which an
> activity propagates itself from one element to the next, within a
> given domain, and founds this propagation on a structuration of the
> domain that is realized from place to place: each area of the
> constituted structure serves as the principle and the model for the
> next area, as a primer for its constitution, to the extent that the
> modification expands progresively at the same time as the structuring
> operation. (Simondon 2009: 11).”

The term is hard to work with, and Haltiwanger proposes a replacement:
*calcification* . This is easier explained as “what has come before you
an what you choose to put back into it is going to define the next layer
of bone that the world is growing”). In other words, e-publishing is
constantly reshaped by the tools and practices we choose to employ now.

Finally, there is a matter of *reciprocity:* helping the computer with
the right input so that it delivers the desire output. HTML is,
according to Haltiwanger, the best suited format for the future of
e-publishing.

Haltiwanger believes that tools in general evolve reciprocally with
their use, as do the users of those tools. What we can do and what we
wish we could do are enabled (or limited) not only by the tools we have
access to but also by the larger socio-economic conditions that
determine these tools and their modes of production and operation. Tools
actively participate in shaping our identity as producers, makers, and
appreciators. Through the case study of a multi-output typesetting
workflow that uses only Libre software, his talk explored a vocabulary
to think differently about how we work with text today, one of that
focuses on qualities of re-composition and the dynamics of a different
type of ownership.

The essential questions here, as Haltiwanger proposed in the end, are
not only what tools and what experience to build but also what is the
underlying skeleton of our endeavors.

You can find a PDF of his original presentation here: [Presentation John
Haltiwanger](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S2_04_JohnHaltiwanger.pdf)

 

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562329](imgs/477910239_640.jpg)



# Joost Kircz: Going Electronic {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [irina](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/irina/ "Posts by irina"),
June 5, 2014 at 1:08 am.

![](imgs/Joost.jpg)

*A post by Mathijs Weijers*

Joost Kircz was the first speaker of the 2-day conference “Off the Press
– Electronic Publishing in the Arts”, organized by the Institute of
Network Cultures. From 2006 till 2013, Kircz was a part-time lecturer on
electronic publishing within the Amsterdam University of Applied
Sciences (Hogeschool van Amsterdam), and currently he is involved with
the Digital Publishing Toolkit research project. He regularly publishes
his findings on his personal website, [www.kra.nl](http://www.kra.nl/).

Kircz’s presentation was about the various technical requirements and
design standards that different types of electronic books need.
“Electronic book publishing in the Arts is a multifarious adventure. On
the one hand, electronic publishing is already an unclear notion and on
the other hand the notion ‘Arts’ is something nobody agrees on anyway”,
Kircz mused. He then introduced The Digital Publishing Toolkit, a
project initiated by the Institute of Network Cultures in partnership
with [Knowledge Center Creating 010](http://creating010.hr.nl/) of the
Hogeschool van Rotterdam, and a number of publishers: “with this toolkit
we want to be able to refrain from deep philosophical preoccupations and
– as this conference will prove – are able to develop methods and
techniques that help publishers, editors and authors to use electronic
means to recreate old works and to create novel ones”. He argued that we
must see Electronic Publishing as complimentary to print publishing and
not just a change from paper-to-screen. What publishers need, and what
the toolkit aims to provide, is easy to use, open source software (more
about the Digital Publishing Toolkit, which is due to be release by the
end of this year, can be read
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/aboutus/)).

Kircz argued that one of the most important features from the electronic
medium is its active memory, “a memory that allows for endless reuse and
multiple presentations on a great variety of substrates”. What he also
pointed out is that content stored in an electronic memory cannot be
read by humans. It is instead stored in a coded form: “(…) the most
important conclusion we can draw from the fact that we use structured
coded information as basis for book production, is that this demands new
working methods throughout the whole process from author to reader. As
soon as we take a step away from just a replication from the printed
page, our design, our editorial practises, as well as our production and
dissemination will change from bottom to top and back”, Kircz warned.

Different types of publishing materials might require different
treatment. Kircz laid out four major toolkit scenarios:

1\) Art/design catalogue;

Each kind of publication needs a different kind of approach in terms of
use of metadata. What we read in a digital publication has much of this
meta structure surrounding it, but we do not see it (i.e. a simple
sentence like “ All you need is love” is in fact written in, for
example, HTML code: \<quotation\> All you need is love \</quotation\>).
This metadata can be used to specify and design almost any desired
content and outcome but can also be complex to use.

What publishers need then is easy, readable software to work with. Kircz
offered a short history of existing Mark-up Languages that address this
need:

-   SGML (1982) – which he described as the mother of all other coding
    languages;
-   HTML 5 (most up-to-date ) – which is readable for humans;
-   Epub3 (most up-to-date) –  a competition to HTML5.

What the Digital Publishing Toolkit aims to do is add further resources,
tools and software to this list and aid publishers in their e-publishing
endeavours.

Kircz concluded that “(…) the central issue of our toolkit project is
that we consciously try and define the creation, production, and
consumption of a creative object as one single process. We try and
experiment to create a production pipeline of illustrated texts or
textually explicated collections of images in such a way that right from
the beginning we understand, and appreciate that electronic publishing
is more than reworking existing works, but a new creative branch in
human expression.”

You can find a PDF of his original presentation here: [Presentation
Joost
Kircz](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S1_01_JoostKircz.pdf)

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562227](imgs/477909407_640.jpg)



# Angie Keefer: The difference between the two {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [irina](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/irina/ "Posts by irina"),
May 29, 2014 at 11:28 am.

Angie Keefer is a writer, artist, and co-founder of [The Serving
Library](http://www.servinglibrary.org/), along with David Reinfurt and
Stuart Bailey of [Dexter Sinister](http://www.dextersinister.org/).

The Serving Library, as described by Keefer, is a cooperatively-built
archive that assembles itself by publishing means. It first releases
e-publications of the artworks and texts of various artists under PDF
format, for free (but only for a period of six months), after which the
latter are printed and sold.

However, Keefer’s presentation specifically focused on the house font of
The Serving Library – called Meta-the-Difference-Between-the-Two font,
based on the typesetting language of Tex – and how its digital origins
relate to design possibilities. She allowed the audience to delve into
the video titled “[Letter & Spirit](http://vimeo.com/65248695)”. The
18-minute production presents both a history and a philosophy of fonts
by simultaneously playing with the animated typing it uses to convey the
message.

You can find a PDF of her original presentation here: [Presentation
Angie
Keefer](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S4_04_AngieKeefer.pdf).

![Video: http://vimeo.com/65248695](imgs/436281081_640.jpg)



# Sebastian Luetgert – Precarious Publishing, Autonomous Archiving, Collaborative Collecting {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [jakubdutka](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/jakubdutka/ "Posts by jakubdutka"),
May 28, 2014 at 9:18 am.



![](imgs/14228184926_af7a4bfe9c_z.jpg)
Sebastian Luetgert at the closing session of Off the Press 2014



Sebastian Luetgert, a.k.a. Robert Luxemburg, is a theorist and media
artist, copyleft advocate, programmer, writer, co-moderator of
[nettime](http://www.nettime.org/), member of mikro and Bootlab. His
projects include rolux.org, [textz.com](http://monoskop.org/Textz.com),
[project Gutenberg](http://www.gutenberg.org/), and Last Tuesday, where
people can “exchange mp3 files, beta-test new viruses from Asia or vote
for the most stupid new dot-com brand.”. He is also the author of “2 x 5
Years of German Internet” and other texts on the contradictions of the
network society. He is currently working on a fictional documentary film
set in Dubai.

Sebastian addressed the issues of e-book circulation, which he finds
impoverished by the current mediascape. As he went on to explicate, on
the internet we can observe two dominating trends: either gigantic,
difficult to manage ‘dumpsters’ of files, or personal ‘libraries’ of
ebooks, like Calibre. As a proposed solution to this unfavourable status
quo, Sebastian introduced his project [Open Media
Library](http://openmedialibrary.com/#about), which he developed
together with Jan Gerber.



![](imgs/14064753617_260b047e9d_z.jpg)
Sebastian Luetgert demonstrates the Open Media Library



Open Media Library is a local web application that lets you manage and
sync digital media collections. This library software can be described
as “something like iTunes for books, with other libraries instead of a
store, running in your web browser”. What Sebastian proposes in his
project is changing the mindset from peer-to-peer file sharing to
archive-to-archive exchange. Open Media Library allows users to see
other peers’ book collections, download them, create own read-list or
wishlist, upload and explore different ways of browsing and
display.

The software runs in the web browser and supports EPUBs, PDFs and any
other book format for which there is javascript reader, as well as plain
text. At the moment there is no stable version of the software and no
standalone installer, but users willing to try out the Open Media
Library can run it from Terminal(Mac) or PowerShell(Windows), following
[instructions on the website.](http://openmedialibrary.com/#download)

If you want to know more about the project, contact Sebastian and Jan
:[openmedialibrary@openmedialibrary.com](https://twitter.com/opmedlib)





![Video: http://vimeo.com/97508729](imgs/477911819_640.jpg)



# Oliver Wise – Making .epubs easy with The People’s E-book {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [jakubdutka](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/jakubdutka/ "Posts by jakubdutka"),
May 28, 2014 at 10:22 am.



![](imgs/14056853788_e5e6b2ba54_z.jpg)
Oliver Wise presenting how to use The People’s E-book.



Oliver Wise, together with Eleanor Hanson are the co-founders of The
Present Group, a creative studio creating affordable and sustainable
models for funding artists. In their first three years, their
[subscription art project](http://thepresentgroup.com/faq?tpg=about) has
channeled over \$20,000 toward funding artist projects, stipends, and
development of critical essays. In May 2010 they began a [web hosting
project](http://thepresentgroup.com/hosting) where a portion of the fees
fund prizes for contemporary artists. Hosting clients get to vote on the
recipient of each grant. At Off the Press Oliver presented their latest
project, in collaboration with [Hol Art
Books](http://www.holartbooks.com/), [The People’s
E-book,](http://beta.thepeoplesebook.net/) a free online e-book creation tool. The
enterprise started on Kickstarter and raised three times the pledged
goal, with 920 backers.

The goal, Oliver said, was to make the People’s E-book as simple as
possible to encourage and facilitate experimentation with the medium.
Given the EPUB’s finicky nature, Oliver and
his colleagues decided to strip it down to bare essentials: title, cover
image and page(s). In order to make The People’s E-book as user-friendly
as possible, instead of Markdown, it uses a WYSIWYG interface. This,
however, created some problems, since WYSIWYG, being designed to work in
browsers, offers a range of options which would not work on e-readers.
To prevent any potential problems with display and re-flowability, the
WYSIWYG had to be restricted to a certain extent.

The choice of EPUB as the format was justified by the following :



![](imgs/14241288482_544cb9c4f8_z.jpg)
Oliver Wise demonstrates the use of The People’s E-book



-   

    it works offline, is
    self-contained and facilitates safe archiving of texts, as opposed
    to websites and links

    

-   

    for text, EPUB can be
    read on a variety of devices using free apps and brings general good
    reading experience

    

-   

    people buy it, so
    artists can use EPUB publications as a source of supplementary
    income

    

-   

    it’s less ephemereal, as
    opposed to social media, which are designed to be consumed instantly
    and flow through. EPUB offers a slower and more stable kind of
    experience.

    

Oliver expressed the hope that maybe one day EPUB will take on a life of
its own, like the GIF format, with thousands of people around the world
self-identifying themselves as GIF artists. One of the further
experiments undertaken by Oliver and Eleanor with EPUB format is the
[Streambooks](http://streambooks.thepeoplesebook.net/#/stream), a tool
allowing to convert any [Tumblr](https://www.tumblr.com/) blog into an
e-book.

You can find a PDF of his original presentation here: [Presentation
Oliver
Wise](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S2_02_OliverWise.pdf)

Follow Oliver on Twitter : @owise1oliver@thepresentgroup.comgithub.com/peoples-ethepresentgroup.comhttp://beta.thepeoplesebook.net/

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562327](imgs/477910338_640.jpg)



# Miriam Rasch – Hybrid Workflows for Hybrid Publishing {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [jakubdutka](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/jakubdutka/ "Posts by jakubdutka"),
May 28, 2014 at 12:28 am.



![](imgs/14057602360_c654d55103_z.jpg)
Miriam Rasch



Miriam Rasch, a co-editor (together with René König) of [INC Reader \#9,
Society of the Query: Reflections on Web
Search,](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/portal/publication/society-of-the-query-reader-reflections-on-web-search/)
presented the workflow she and her colleagues followed while working on
the Reader. The Institute of Network Cultures project group involved:
Joost Kircz, Silvio Lorusso, Michael Murtaugh, and Kimmy Spreeuwenberg. Miriam
described their creative process following the principles of hybrid
publishing – creating one publication for several different output
formats. The reasoning behind it was to move the INC publications beyond
the print format and facilitate the distribution on digital
devices.

Miriam went on to describe INC’s efforts to disseminate
their publications. All the publications are distributed under Creative
Commons license and the print copies can be ordered for free. INC uses a
number of platforms (for
instance [ISUU)](http://issuu.com/instituteofnetworkcultures) and file
formats to expedite the distribution of its publications. They also
introduced two innovative digital formats: iPad magazine and personal
EPUB. The iPad magazine, designed to target a broader audience, features
a selection of 10 articles from the Reader translated into Dutch, with
added pictures and video clips. Due to its multimedia nature its only
available on iPad. The personal EPUB is an interactive way of choosing
articles of one’s interest (up to 10) from the INC database and
compiling them into an e-book, in DIY fashion. Moreover, a variety of
additional materials are available online, the most notable example
being materials from a range of conferences organised by INC, like
[Society of the Query](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/query/), [Money
Lab](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/moneylab/) or [Unlike
Us](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/unlikeus/). The conference
materials, including pictures and video clips are available on
[Flickr](https://www.flickr.com/photos/networkcultures/sets/)and
[Vimeo](http://vimeo.com/networkcultures/videos). More information can
be found on [INC’s website.](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/portal/)

![](imgs/14240898741_0dd918cefb_z.jpg)

You can find a PDF of her original presentation here: [Presentation
Miriam
Rasch](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S3_02_MiriamRasch.pdf)

Miriam writes books reviews and guest posts for different websites and
magazines. Look up her [personal blog](http://www.miriamrasch.nl/).

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562332](imgs/477910524_640.jpg)



# Marcell Mars: Free access to resources for every member of society {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [irina](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/irina/ "Posts by irina"),
May 28, 2014 at 1:16 pm.

![](imgs/Marcell-Mars-photo.jpg)

The final session of the “Off the Press: Electronic Publishing in Arts”
conference approached another side of the e-publishing field, namely
what happens after the e-books are launched: where do we distribute,
store and manage them?

In traditional publishing, perhaps the most iconic actor to play this
role is the public library. However, as Mars pointed out in his talk,
the public library itself is currently under a financial, social and
political threat. Furthermore, there is still the question which actors
can take up its role in the virtual world. Proprietary platforms like
Google or Amazon have already stated their ambitions to become such
global knowledge keepers, but this comes with the danger of intellectual
copyrights and censorship. Mars, alongside with the other speakers of
this session, discussed the existing alternatives: open, collaborative,
non-proprietary platforms. How can they be designed to best fit the role
of public libraries, and how should they adapt this role online?



Mars is a hacker, activist and researcher with a strong interest in book
sharing and book hacking. He began by explaining the very narrative
associated with the public library concept. The latter, he argues,
embodies humanity’s dream of an epistemological heaven. The thought of
being able to generate knowledge about knowledge has always been an
ideal often reflected in philosophy as well (take the example of Leibniz
and his proposal to have a language so formal that it would explain and
recreate everything – much like humanity’s hopes with the public
library). In reality, however, public libraries were built after the
French revolution in the 19^th^ century and were far from the ideal of
open access to everyone, argues Mars. In this sense, public libraries
have always been gripped by politics – one example is that access is
conditioned to being a citizen (have a valid ID card and residence
within the city/country, which excludes vulnerable groups such as
refugees or immigrants). The public libraries world-wide are furthermore
constrained by financial cuts and even shut-downs. They are not able to
buy books and borrow them, since publishers agree only on licensing
contracts – a problematic proprietary regime.

In this context, what vision of public library should we strive for in
the digital world?

Mars identifies [three essential pillars of the public
library](http://www.memoryoftheworld.org/blog/2012/11/26/end-to-end-catalog/)
that also translate to the digital ones: **free access, a library
catalogue and the librarian**.

Mars strongly advocates for **free access** of resources for everyone,
instead of access by means of identification. The **library catalogue
equivalent online is the web index**, argues Mars. Essentially, whoever
has a more powerful and refined way of indexing all the knowledge is in
fact seizing it altogether. Google is currently the most famous player
when it comes to indexing, in close competition with Amazon’s index.
Monopolization is dangerous, warned Mars. Instead, he supports the idea
of having many more, alternative and collaborative indexes, thus
decentralizing the process of knowledge sharing. In this vision, anyone
can become a librarian, and “**when everyone is librarian, library is
everywhere**”. He gave the example of
[Calibre](http://calibre-ebook.com/demo) – a platform where users can
manage their own e-books, convert to different formats, tag, search,
share, download (but also purchase from publishers), and connect with
other users. The major strength of Calibre, Mars points out, is that its
technical design allows sociability. With Calibre, a user can connect
any PC to the Calibre built-in server and thus has access to their
e-book collection, as well as to the network of Calibre librarians
everywhere. The capability to use independent servers rather than via
third-party providers is also desirable in order to protect these online
catalogues.

Mars also mentioned a number of other online collections and platforms
for e-book sharing, among which are [aaaaarg.org](http://aaaaarg.org/),
[LibGen](http://lib.freescienceengineering.org/),
[UbuWeb](http://www.ubuweb.com/) or
[Monoskop](http://monoskop.org/Monoskop). While some are just online
depositories, others host entire communities of librarians, researcher
and readers. In the end, the purpose is not to have just one universal
(digital) public library, but rather many small ones that work in a
decentralized, collaborative manner.

*Marcell Mars is one of the founders of Multimedia Institute â€“ mi2 and
net.culture club mama in Zagreb. He initiated Public Library, GNU GPL
publishing label EGOBOO.bits, started Skill sharing in mama + Skill
sharing’s satellites g33koskop, ‘Nothing will happen’ and ‘The Fair of
Mean Equipment’. His full biography
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/22-23-may-2014/biographies/).*

![Video: http://vimeo.com/97508731](imgs/477911980_640.jpg)



# Dušan Barok: Communing Texts {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [irina](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/irina/ "Posts by irina"),
May 28, 2014 at 5:55 pm.

![](imgs/Dusan-Barok-pic.jpg)

[Monoskop](http://monoskop.org/Monoskop) (a wiki for art, culture and
media technology).

The Internet is not just a medium to distribute, store and manage
e-books, he continues, but is in itself a medium that dictates specific
means of reading and writing. As far as reading is concerned, many
e-books are downloaded and bookmarked but in the end never read. Barok
identifies the cause in that “they may contain something relevant but
they begin at the beginning and end at the end” – in other words, their
linearity is an obstacle for readers searching only for specific
information. With full text search functionality available, why bother
reading everything? Instead of humans, these e-books end up being read
by machines. As far as writing is concerned, plain text might now be
rendered to new formats like HTML, XML, wikitext or markdown, but Barok
believes that coding holds an untapped potential in linking e-books to
each other, much like referencing does in traditional publishing.

Thus, one of e-publishing’s most important unrealized potential is, in
Barok’s opinion, contextual reading. An e-book is rarely a closed box;
rather, it links to other content and authors, something that we
formally know in traditional publishing as referencing.

Referencing has always been a trademark of writing and an act of
comradeship in order to guide the reader to another writer’s passage.
This is a laborious work with analogue books, since readers need to get
up, go to the library or bookstore and find the other referenced book.
On the web, this is a click away thanks to the hyperlink. The difference
though is that in analogue books, referencing is done by writers,
whereas with e-books the process is completely machinist. Both have
their cons. The readers of analogue books rarely check the references
and instead accept the interpretation of the referencing author (“the
beauty of reading across references was never fully realized”, muses
Barok). Are readers of e-books then more critical? Barok suggests not,
as hyperlinking takes the readers to the whole referenced paper, and not
the passage it directly refers to. The abundance of hyperlinks,
especially in popular news articles, make it almost impossible for
readers check everything. This lack of critical effort often paves the
way for journalists and writers to manipulate others’ quotes, by taking
them out of the original context or only quoting half the sentence.
These deceptions can only be counteracted by the very few careful
readers that would bother commenting on those articles, but what if the
“Comments” section is closed? What happens to vigilance in online
publishing? Isn’t e-publishing supposed to put author and reader in a
more direct, bi-directional relationship? Or, for that matter, to allow
e-publications to further connect  to each other by means of
referencing?

The major obstacle, argues Barok, is that e-publishing persists in old
formats. In history, content has been written on stone, on columns,
papyrus and paper. Writers have developed a framework that is here
today: the use of grids, of paragraph, of punctuation, of arranging
space. However, he explains, examples such as the early [scriptio
continua](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scriptio_continua) style (a text
that essentially flows in one line) or Plato’s
[Phaedrus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phaedrus_(dialogue)) (originally
written without any punctuation, word or paragraph separators) to
illustrate how it is still possible to locate a passage regardless of
how text is displayed and what tags it contains.

The essential difference between the medium of paper and that of code is
that the latter has a completely different materiality. Despite this, we
are still treating HTML codes to render page-like formats and follow
grid rules, albeit the code itself could allow for much more
exploration. The way that humans structure e-publications reflects old
habits (pages need to be rectangular) or cultural habits (text letters
to allow readability). What would happen if we renounced the use of grid
and rather let text render itself according to the space we offer it – a
good example for this is the conference’s interactive logo. Why is the
technical possibility to reference-link directly to the passage rather
than the entire document so little discussed?

“There is a tremendous amount of both old and recent texts online but we
haven’t done much in opening them up to contextual reading”, Barok
concluded. If the Internet is changing our way of reading, it is only to
allow distraction from linearity, context and vigilance. To counter-act
the latter, Barok suggests to authors, designers, publishers and
developers to further explore ways in which referencing and content
display can help readers engage with their e-books and immerse in new
reading experiences. The way linking takes place on the web and the way
scholars reference their works are two perspectives that could unite for
a better communing of texts in e-publishing.

![Video: http://vimeo.com/97508732](imgs/477911824_640.jpg)



# Conference report: Off the Press {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [margreet
riphagen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/arjen/ "Posts by margreet riphagen"),
May 28, 2014 at 12:12 pm.

During the conference OFF THE PRESS: ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING IN THE ARTS,
a comprehensive conference report has been written by Arie Altena.

The full report can be downloaded here:

![](imgs/inc_icon_issuu_@2x.png)

![](imgs/inc_icon_pdf_@2x.png)

 

Or read online: [part
1](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/05/off-the-press-report-i/)
and [part
2](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/05/off-the-press-report-day-ii/).



# Alessandro Ludovico – Networks as agents in the clash between personal and industrial post-digital print {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [jakubdutka](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/jakubdutka/ "Posts by jakubdutka"),
May 28, 2014 at 11:36 am.



![](imgs/14241082322_e72754dc53_z.jpg)
Alessandro Ludovico during his talk on day 1 of Off the Press 2014



Alessandro Ludovico, the author of *[Post-Digital Print, The Mutation Of
Publishing Since 1894](http://monoskop.org/log/?p=4165), *is an Italian
media critic and editor in chief of *Neural* magazine
(<http://neural.it/>) since 1993, for which he received an honorary
mention of the Prix [Ars
Electronica](http://monoskop.org/Ars_Electronica) 2004. He has published
and edited several books, and has lectured worldwide. He’s one of the
founders of [Mag.Net](http://postdigitalprint.org/)(Electronic Cultural
Publishers organization). He has been guest researcher at the Willem De
Kooning Academy in Rotterdam and he teaches at the Academy of Art in
Carrara. He is one of the authors of the *[Hacking Monopolism trilogy of
artworks](http://www.face-to-facebook.net/hacking-monopolism-trilogy.php)
([Google WIll Eat Itself](http://www.gwei.org/index.php), [Amazon
Noir](http://www.amazon-noir.com/thestory.html), [Face to
Facebook](http://www.face-to-facebook.net/index.php))*. He is currently
a PhD scholar at Anglia Ruskin University in Cambridge (UK).

Alessandro begun his lecture by addressing the changing mediascape,
shaped by two opposing forces: on one side the underground, personal
agendas and, on the other side, the corporate interests of Google and
the like. The post-digital print era is witnessing the booming in
net-content or IT-processes based artist’s books (with a whole taxonomy
of techniques and approaches), and the efforts in collective scanning of
underground culture in print, shared in proper digital repositories, is
revamping the production and rediscovering of critical content in a
classic form. On the other side, the unveiling of Google’s major plan
with the industrial scanning, the rising of the un-sustainability of
newspapers’ business model, the growing role of software in literary and
journalistic production, and the constant fine-tuning of commercial
e-publications’ rules.



![](imgs/Peter_Millson_Weymouth_lo.jpg)
Paul Soulellis



Alessandro went on to describe the taxonomy of publications scraping the
information from the internet. As a prime example, he introduced a New
York-based artist and creative director, Paul Soulellis, the founder
of [Library of the Printed
Web](http://libraryoftheprintedweb.tumblr.com/), a curatorial
project organized around artists who use screen capture, image grab,
site scrape and search query to develop printed matter from content
found on the web. Soulellis has tried to define this common strategy as
a sequence of “search, compile, publish.” Due to the coupling of free
content available on the internet in ‘big data’ proportions with the
inexpensive Print-on-Demand platforms, a new type of artists’ books has
emerged – one that ‘scrapes’ or ‘harvests’ content from the Internet and
re-work it into book format. Ludovico, after Soulellis, attempted to
compile a draft taxonomy through three categories:

-   **Grabbing (and scraping)**: artists who perform web searches query
    and grab (with intent) the results. They are interested in how the
    search engine articulates the idea. An example of that approach is
    *56 Broken Kindle Screens* – by Silvio Lorusso and Sebastian Schmieg
    (2012)

-   **Hunting**: The hunter takes a highly specific screen capture that
    functions as evidence to support an idea. They reject almost all of
    what they find because they’re looking for the exception. See [*A
    Series of Unfortunate
    Events*](http://photomichaelwolf.com/#book-asoue)(2010) by Michael
    Wolf – a compilation of [weird or bizarre situations that had been
    captured by Google’s Street View
    cameras.](https://www.lensculture.com/articles/michael-wolf-a-series-of-unfortunate-events)
-   **Performing**: Those are artists making work that involves the
    acting out of a procedure, in a narrative fashion, in a kind of
    performance between web and print. A performance with data, or how
    he put it: publishing performing the Internet. An example here is
    the *[American
    Psycho](traumawien.at/prints/american-psycho/) *published by
    TRAUMAWIEN.

All the approaches presented above enable for the
‘[transduction](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transduction_%28genetics%29)’
between the internet and the print  book, namely they take a sequential,
or reductive part of the web and mould it into traditional publishing
guidelines. It is often the case that this practice is undertaken to
compansate for the imbalance between the colossal amount of information
available instantly on the internet and the limited human capacity to
process this information comprehensively.

The process of digitising everything is two-fold: it comprises of
creating natively digital content and digitising analogue cultural
objects through scanning. This **dematerialisation**, to quote Jacques
Derrida, is “a very deceptive word meaning that in truth they are moving
from one kind of matter to[*La Carte Ou Le
Territoire*](http://bcc.stdin.fr/LaCarteOuLeTerritoire/) (‘The Map or
the Territory’), which exploits Google Book searches to find identical
phrases across texts, revealing the ‘plagiarised’ nature of all writing.

Google’s efforts to digitise all human knowledge through the Google
Books project are widely discussed in academia and otherwise. Initially
advertised as a “dream of a universal library”, Google Books has been
interpreted and unveiled for its own final goal, which is creating
artificial intelligence. *Google and the World Brain* (2013), through
interviews with people directly involved, investigates the whole scope
of the project.

As opposed to the monopolistic inclinations of Google, Ludovico
introduced individuals and groups which strive to digitise culture in
order to facilitate the spread of knowledge, free of charge. To further
illustrate his point, Ludovico used three examples from Italian hacker
community :

![](imgs/14056684059_04960903f0_z.jpg)

1.  The Grafton 9 collective in Bologna which is scanning the political
    cyberpunk culture of
2.   ‘Archivio il Sessantotto’ (Archive of 1968) in Florence – a huge
    archive of political magazines, poster and leaflets about left
    activism.
3.   ‘Germinal’ archive in Carrara, which is also the historical archive
    of one of the biggest national anarchic communities, which has
    already started to scan their unique collection of

Drawing from Jeffrey Schnapp, Alessandro affirmed:

> “the book is a construct in constant evolution: a construct that
> routinely and dynamically interacts with a shifting array of other
> media types. In other words, the book is a technology.”

The statement above is embodied by the post-digital print, which reacted
to and reflected on the advent and subsequent ubiquity of digitised
texts. In order to survive to the online competion even newspapers since
a decade have included more ‘data’ in their own visual structure than
they ever did, in the form of big figure or sophisticated infographics.
Examples go further, to name only a few: books by Marshall McLuhan,
Jerome Agel and Quentin Fiore. The main question, then, is whether the
internet is a new medium, or just an accumulation of all the ‘old’
media? Photographs, texts, video clips, all predate the internet. If not
a ‘real’ medium, is the internet an agent, inducing radical changes in
other historical media, but leaving their inner core intact?

You can find a PDF of his original presentation here: [Presentation
Alessandro
Ludovico](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S1_02_Alessandro-Ludovico.pdf)

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96574475](imgs/477909957_640.jpg)



# Pia Pol: Digitizing Context Without Walls, Creating EPubs Through the EPubster Generator {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [patricia](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/murtaugh/ "Posts by patricia"),
May 27, 2014 at 1:39 pm.

![](imgs/pia.jpg)

The publishing house Valiz publishes Context Without Walls (CWW), a
series of book publications focused on the work of artists from all over
the world. The books in this series are multilingual, rich in images and
text, and the design is meticulous. From the first publication in this
series, Common Skin, Valiz and their designers have attempted to create
a digital version.

It goes without saying that many difficulties arise when converting a
publication like Common Skin to the digital realm. How do you deal with
the richness of the visual language and the textual design of the book
version? What kind of format should be used? How can you make keywords
link to the indexes of the book? And what to do with all the footnotes
of each publication? As part of the Digital Publishing Toolkit
Initiative Valiz worked on the Epubster Generator tool to tackle these
questions.



With the Epubster Generator, an open source software tool for editing
and designing ebooks, a publisher can create EPub3s with a wide range of
extensive image and design options. But there is more, the Epubster
Generator

-   it’s ePubs can be sold to different platforms – a common problem of
    digital publishing
-   its style sheets can be amended and reused for different styles to
    create series
-   you can add style sheets and metadata – the latter is particularly
    important if you want to sell the book
-   you can use hyperlinks in text
-   both markdown and rich text can be used
-   changes in text and image can be made directly in the program

Pol explains that their focus has been on developing a tool that is both
easy to use and sustainable. However, there are some more style and
design problems that they need to tackle. How to deal with the page
divisions and centrefolds that are a crucial part of Common Skin? And
how can we make it completely bug-free? These are questions Pia Pol and
her team will be working on and seek solutions to during the last leg of
the Digital Publishing Toolkit development period.

You can find a PDF of her original presentation here: [Presentation Pia
Pol](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S3_03_PiaPol.pdf)

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562363](imgs/477910548_640.jpg)



# Off the Press – Report Day I {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [ariealtena](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/ariealtena/ "Posts by ariealtena"),
May 27, 2014 at 10:44 pm.

*Off the Press, Electronic Publishing in the Arts* is the third one in a
series on the state of electronic publishing that started with the
Unbound Book (http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/unboundbook/),
and was more recently followed by the presentation of the research of
The Publishing Toolkit at the Hogeschool van Amsterdam in november 2013.

A disclosure of my particular interest, perspective and background might
be appropriate. I studied Literary Theory, and learned HTML back in
1994, and taught basic HTML in my days at Mediamatic. Though I use
WordPress for my blog. I still maintain my website using hand-coded HTML
(plus a few line of CSS). It does the trick – my website also displays
fine on a smartphone or tablet as far as I know. I’m an editor, writer,
theorist –  not a designer. In the past few months I’ve been tinkering
with various editorial tools and ways of making epubs – and created two
epubs for Sonic Acts. I have not been part of the Publishing Toolkit
project, but up to a certain point I have traced a similar trajectory.
Some of the remarks in the report will derive from that experience.

Geert Lovink introduces the conference and workshop programme stating
that it is important to raise the critical issues in the world of
electronic publishing. He outlines the context of contemporary
publishing with bookshops (for printed books) in decline, and ebooks
still on the rise (they have entered the market for educational
publishing). The ambition of the Digital Publishing Toolkit programme is
to make sure that we – I assume he means citizens, students, readers,
artists, small publishers – are empowered by the tools we use, and are
able to shape the tools and the discussion, instead of leaving it all to
Google, Amazon and other large players that know how to bundle power,
money and attention to shape tools, access to knowledge and culture.



**Structured Data**

Joost Kircz is the perfect speaker to kick off the conference, that is,
if you want to emphasize the *structural* aspects underpinning computer
publishing, and bring in knowledge acquired in more than 25 years in the
business. Joost Kircz’ experience in electronic publishing and database
publishing goes back to 1987. He gives a perfect summary of what happens
with editing and publishing when you work electronically. He stresses
the fundamental issue: electronic publishing means storing data in code
which is not human readable, but can be manipulated in many ways. Markup
needs to be structural, to enable output in different media. This all
goes back to SGML (1982), to HTML as sloppy implementation of SGML, to
XML. A good history lesson, in which he also quickly refers to Markdown
as *editing* tool.

Structured, coded data is the basis for electronic book production. This
fundamental ‘truth’ can’t be repeated often enough as it is apparently
still not understood by many people who work in writing, editing and
publishing. Presentation and content should be strictly separated in
electronic publication. If they are strictly separate, and content is
stored in a structured database, then it’s search, store and retrieve.
The structured data can be used for output in a great variety of media.
Books are made of documents, which are made of paragraphs (and other
structured ‘bits’ of data), which are made of words, made of letters,
made of ASCII, made of, in the end, bits. And then there are metadata of
course. There is no going back to the old way of making books.

This is what anybody should know, I guess, but this is also where the
problems begin. If you understand that it works this way, and that it
has been like this ever since the 1980s, one wonders why the workflows
in publishing is still not based on this model. (One exception being
database publishing in the academic world). And why, given that this
model is so clear and simple, is the reality of electronic publishing
such a mess? (Was the mess-up created by the sloppy implementation of
HMTL, has the development of visual web design been a factor, or is it
because of the dominance of Word?) The other issue is that the strict
division is all fine when you deal with text. But what happens with
content in which it’s the visual aspect that carries the meaning? Then
maintaining this division is either banal (insignificant), or impossible
to maintain. I guess that in a computer and database universe the answer
is that when it’s solely visual, it should be an image-file.

What an optimal editorial workflow is in an electronic world is not so
difficult to imagine. But though most of us have worked electronically
at least 25 years (unless you’re younger than that, and you have worked
electronically pretty much all the time anyway – at least when you’re
not a zine-making artist), there is no tool that *really* fits the job.
A lot of this surely has to do with the adoption of Word (and Word-like)
word processors as default writing software since the late 1980s. I
could start ranting here – but won’t. Part of the research of the
Digital Publishing Toolkit is to come up with an editorial tool for
small publishers. In a sense it’s the Holy Grail for editors: a tool
that allows you to do the whole editing process, ending with a
clean source document that can be use for various media outputs. (And
generates good and well-formed output…). Theoretically it should be
‘super-easy’ to create simple epubs from clean texts which are also used
for the web, for print publication, for database publication, epubs
which work fine on any device (and do not mess up the presentation)… –
especially since epub is an open standard… Welcome to reality: there is
no perfect technological fix.

**Post-Digital Publishing**

Alessandro Ludovico – editor of *Neural* (<http://neural.it>) and expert
in post digital publishing (see <http://postdigitalprint.org>) – gives
an overview of a specific culture of artist books, made possible by the
coupling of online free digital content, print on demand, and simple
scripting. This has created a new taxonomy of publications that scrape
content from the internet. ‘Search, compile, publish’. It’s the idea of
the ‘Library of the printed internet’. Ludovico mentions three methods
that are used to produce books from existing online content: 1. grabbing
and scraping, 2. hunting. 3. performance. Sometimes these experiments
are exhilarating – not as books itself, but rather conceptually.
TraumaWien’s massive production of books made from Youtube comments come
to mind (See more below). As well as various other non-artistic misuses
of the print on demand systems and Amazon to sell real books, which are
books (as they are bound stacks of paper), but the content is, well,
spam?

The second subject Alessandro Ludovico  puts in the mix is industrial
scanning of books – as done by for instance Google Books. What he does
not mention, but what I find very interesting, is that industrial
scanning has made possible new ways of doing literary theory and
literary history too. The ‘big data’ of Google Books and the
possibilities of searching through an enormous corpus is used to gain
new insights on both the history of literature, and through that also on
history. I am of course referring to Franco Moretti’s books (a.o. on
*The Bourgeois* in the 19th Century) and the Stanford Literary Lab
(<http://litlab.stanford.edu/>). Moretti’s take on this is quite down to
earth. The thousands of scanned books – which nobody will ever read –
can be used to get *some* insight on the development of ideas, and of
daily life. Human intelligence is needed to obtain these insights and
critically evaluate them. (It is the same sort of ‘big data’-use that
allows Thomas Piketty insight in the evolution of income and capital in
his book *Capital in the 21st Century*). No superior machine
intelligence is produced in the process, as the Ray Kurzweil’s of this
world would like us to believe. (Upload all the knowledge of the world
in the cloud, have various algorithms harvesting and analysing the data
– and see: new insights and knowledge emerge, eventually making machines
more intelligent than us humans). But let’s not get into the whole
discussion on ‘big data’ and singularity. Alessandro Ludovico refers to
it, but does not open up this ‘box’, instead opting to reflect on the
emergence of hybrid reading ‘forms’, and the ‘Long Read’-format which
now seems to have become a genre of its own. Not only are there now
(more) hybrid forms of reading as before, we also now are more aware
that we use, and always have used different ‘modes’ of reading, there is
more than ‘close reading’ and ‘speed reading’ – there’s scanning,
browsing, deep reading, distant reading (Moretti’s term), and more.

The questions after the presentation are on the current state of Google
Books – as there has not been much ‘news’ on that recently. Florian
Cramer mentions that, judging from the website-design Google Books might
be heading more in the direction of selling (or e-books) than in
pursuing the grand scheme of storing all the knowledge of the world.

**Multi-faceted Practices**

Michael Murtaugh introduces a series of presentations which reflect on
various electronic reading and publishing practices that have emerged
over time. The first one is about using Twitter and Catalan. Elizabeth
Castro – computer book author –  uses Twitter to interview people about
Catalunya and the Catalan language (see \#CatalanTalk). She explains how
she uses the Twitter-interviews in different languages (she has an
online volunteer translation team) about Catalan, how she stores and
archives them using Storify (https://storify.com/). The question is
how to go from Storify to epub? As tweets are basically HTML, this
should be straightforward enough. She explains the workflow. First
export to XML. Create XSLT to filter the XML – of course there is way
too much data in the source code of the tweet, she only needs the body
text. Then she makes an InDesign template, imports the XML, and maps
tags to styles. InDesign to epub can be a good tool – I am told also by
others – if you use InDesign in a very structured way. How she designs
in InDesign is strictly structural and systematic. Not all graphic
designers I know work this way. They might work visually oriented, and
not necessarily ‘structured’ in a technological sense. (Hence the
horrible output when you ‘just’ convert some InDesign files to epub).

Elizabeth Castro, wrote about 100 pages (says Florian Cramer) about
cleaning up InDesign files for epub. So Florian Cramer asks her about
it. She answers that InDesign has become much better in this respect,
but also states that InDesign is simply the tool she has used for a long
time. If another tool fits one’s goal better: use that.

The People’s Ebook
([http://hepeoplesebook.net](http://peoplesebook.net/)), presented by
Oliver Wise, is intended to be the tool to create ebooks in the most
simple way. There are now a number of such tools. (I made the
epub2-version of the Sonic Acts publication *The Dark Universe* with
Pressbooks (<http://pressbooks.com/>), which I found an easy and
agreeable tool which fitted that particular project. I am used to
WordPress, and in Pressbooks is easy to do the footnotes by hand.) The
People’s Ebook uses WYSIWYG for the People’s Ebook, not Markdown.
Markdown would have been easier – they say – but as not many people use
Markdown, it’s not the best choice for them. An interesting experiment
they did is turning Tumblr’s into epubs at
[http://streambooks.thepeoplesebook.net](http://streambooks.thepeoplesebook.net/).
As a lot of webAPI’s gives data in the form of JSON – which is what
their tool wants – so it’s possible to turn a Tumblr into epub
automatically. In fact technologically this is not (so much?) different
from the scraped-free-content artist books that Alessandro Ludovico
mentions.

But why epub? That is a good question, to which Oliver Wise gives good
answers: epubs are self-contained, good for archiving, they enable a
good reading experience (though better than paper? better than a laptop?
I wonder), they are cross-device (or they are when you know how to use
Calibre for conversion). And yes, an important reason is that people buy
them. He’s probably right. Epubs read on an e-reader enhance a
concentrated reading experience, where being online enhances a
‘distracted’, link-following, scanning reading experience (which is not
necessarily bad – it is useful in many circumstances).

**HTML is king/queen?**

Adam Hyde is the man of the Booksprint methodology of making books
(<http://www.booksprints.net/>), Floss Manuals
(<http://booki.flossmanuals.net/>), Booktype
(<http://www.sourcefabric.org/en/booktype/>), and many more similar
projects. He recently did a Booksprint on Booksprints. He gave up art
after art had brought him to Antarctica. He entitled his talk ‘Books are
Evil, 8 years in the wilderness’, and gives an overview of publishing
projects he has been involved in over the years. His first book-making
platform was based on Twiki. He learned that HMTL is ‘king/queen’ – the
source files for his books are always HTML. He has also learned that
doing Farsi in Regex (I did not know what Regex is) is extremely hard –
touching on the language issue that tends to be forgotten in a
predominantly English-focused world. Hyde finds it amazing and
unbelievable that people in the knowledge industry, and publishing still
reject the idea that HTML is king/queen. Not all the speakers here agree
with him, others champion Markdown, or XML, or would say HTML is too
sloppy. Hyde made a whole range of free softwares from Booki and
Booktype to Lexicon, PubSweet, BookJS and Objavi. And learned that doing
something the simple way is the best way. Import and export is all file
conversion. He ends with ‘Monstruous, Belligerent, Learnings’, the
central argument of which is – again – that HTML is ‘it’. He states that
in our world paper books are weird, as they were digital files first. He
has a great metaphor: printed books are like frozen waves. He pleads:
one has to get into the digital space for real – design does not relate
to a fixed thing (a frozen wave – as can be found in Antarctica), but to
data which flows and can be reflowed. Anything else in this world is
crazy. Books – as printed things – are evil: they brought us copyright,
industrial culture, the myth of the solitary genius. The market
conditions for printed books do not exist without these. He pleads:
let’s forget about the book, and really go into collaborative knowledge
production. He’s being provocative – but he is right as well. Why go
back to the book in a networked world? Only at this point the issues
begin. Is science not collaborative knowledge production? Sure this is
possible in a printed book format too? In the discussion later on, he
says that his is a reversed provocation, against the fiction or myth
that books are authored by a single author, even those are not made by a
single author, they are collaborative efforts.

Florian Cramer chimes in and warns that one should not fight windmills,
not fight against a situation that does not exist anymore, or has lost
power. The myth of the single author is not so strong anymore in a time
of Facebook, Amazon, cloud-storage, and the Clay Shirky collective
intelligence cloud-ideology, with the iPad as the most ‘evil tool’. Also
Marcell Mars reacts (from the audience), making a point of the book as a
cultural structure, rather than a technological one – though it is also
technological. He counters Adam Hyde’s championing of HTML, mentioning
that many things that are great about book technology are not solved in
HTML, like pagination, citation and referencing. To which Adam Hyde
replies with the example of the implementation of ‘doi’ (digital object
identifier). It is interesting to see the playing-out of these
differences – shall we call them ideological? – differences that to
almost anyone outside electronic publishing or coding will seem pretty
arcane…

These ideological differences come back in the presentation of John
Haltiwanger about tools for knowledge production. He starts from the
fundamental principle that knowledge production is too important to be
locked in with proprietary software. His writing environment is a
minimal full-text text editor. He invokes Simondon’s concept of
technology and transduction and outlines how the tools we construct and
use form a sort of ’skeleton’ that’s around us in four (sic) dimensions.
Like Adam Hyde he uses a picture of a glacier too. I have to admit that
I loose track of what he’s exactly getting at – maybe it is just how the
technology that we use envelops us and our world. I am too focused now
on the practical issues, it’s not a day for me to contemplate the
differences between Simondon’s philosophy of technology and
cybernetics. John Haltiwanger absolutely loves Markdown, I am told, and
co-leads the pandoc workshop the next day.

**Workflows and Toolkits and Basic Knowledge**

In his introduction to the next panel Florian Cramer puts the issues ‘on
the table’, technological ones and pragmatic ones, concerning online
versus offline, epub versus app versus website, issues of file size,
bandwidth and connectivity. He mentions that many of the apps and tools
that people now use unthinkingly do not work without connectivity. We
are not sure bandwidth will stay as cheap as it is now. (And then he
does not even mention that connectivity means tracking use). The world
of epub, he says, is like the world of web design of the middle 1990s.
There is a beautiful standard (epub2 and epub3), but very bad
implementation and support of it by different reading tools. (An
extremely simple but crazy example is that the CSS of the Kobo Touch
displays the emphasis tag as bold instead of italics). And then, Florian
Cramer says, there’s the unworkable Microsoft/Adobe legacy in the
workflow in the editorial and design world. This makes the question how
to publish both on paper and electronic, which should be simple, quite
problematic. He also says that the promise that electronic publishing is
cheaper than print publication is false. (Though sometimes it is
cheaper, we will hear). A slide ‘you must change your life’ states that
XML is het ideal solution (as Joost Kircz outlined). Florian’s pragmatic
solution is to use simple markup languages like Multimarkdown (which
Adam Hyde is against).

According to Florian Multimarkdown has all the functionality that is
needed for book production, and it has a straightforward and simple
structure. It does body text, three hierarchies of headings, emphasis,
strong, citation, footnotes, lists, and links. (HTML has already too
many possibilities says Cramer). The only problem is – I think – that
not many people are used to such markup languages. I have the impression
(no hard data) that more people can write simple HTML than Markdown. But
I might be mistaken. I’m of the generation who learned to write HTML,
pre-Dreamweaver.

Then it’s over to Miriam Rasch, and the current research of the
Institute of Network Cultures (INC) project group. They made two
anthologies – the INC Reader \#9 and \#8 *Unlike Us* and *Society of the
Query*. (They can be downloaded as PDF and epub at different sites). She
speaks about how she changed her habits and workflow as an editor in the
course of the project. (It partly mirrors my own struggles with using
softwares, tools, and way of collaborations in book projects). Getting
out books in various formats is a way of reaching a larger audience. The
workflow starts with Word-documents of writers, these are edited by
editors, go back and forth. A final document is sent by the editor to
the designer who imports it into InDesign to produce a designed PDF,
which can be printed, and made available digitally. It’s
institutionalised DIY. (Good term). Making the epub of *Unlike Us* was
totally separate – it was the only output format outside this workflow.
(This particular epub is one of the best I ever saw – looking at how it
worked on my Kobo, and inspecting the source code. Many epubs I have on
my Kobo Touch have Table of Contents and footnotes that do NOT work). So
how did the workflow change through producing the epub for *Society of
the Query*? They made Markdown the central document format for keeping
the definite texts and archiving. The workflow became Word —\> MarkDown
—\> HTML —\> output formats (epub, ibook, website et cetera).

They also made a personal epub-machine (coded by Michael Murtaugh) that
allows you to choose from the available material – including stuff which
is not in the original epub, like blogposts, photos, videos associated
to the *Society of the Query* project, and generate a personal epub. But
it can be done, and it’s fun. (Though the idea of the epub as a
self-contained file loses some of its power. I think. As the power of a
self-contained file, as a book with covers, also lies in the fact that
there are identical copies, that others have read the same book (or
epub), and can refer to it as the same book, even though the reading
experience of that same book might differ quite a bit).

*Context Without Walls*, presented by Pia Pol is the project of Valiz
publishers within the Digital Publishing Toolkit project. They created a
digital version of the printed book *Common Skin*, looking at the visual
essays, the footnotes and the extensive indexes. For the toolkit they
made an epub3 generator (EPUBster). She says: ‘we as publishers do not
know how to use Markdown’. The question is: could they not learn it? It
does not take an intensive week workshop, you learn it in two hours.
(She took part in the pandoc workshop the next day). It mystifies me
that apparently people are willing and able to learn Excel and Word –
which I find hard and horrible programs, with way too many and too
complex functionalities – but not Markdown, or basic HTML. Or is it that
people do not know how to use Word and Excel either, but just type in
the open window and hit ‘save? I’m afraid not many people use Word in
the right way, or take advantage of even 20% of its functionalities.
(Who ever received a perfectly formatted Word document that used styles
consequently and in the right way?) Editors do usually know their tools,
or at least the functions they need. But there is definitely a problem –
for education as well – that massive success of consumer-friendly
intuitive interfaces have locked people – except ‘nerds’ – out of
understanding the tools they use, and really making use of them.)

(I did not understand pandoc – the converting tool that Florian Cramer
had advised me to use. I did not even understand where my Mac had saved
the program when I downloaded it. Of course not: it’s a command-line
tool. You need to open the terminal to use it. I’m afraid I hadn’t used
the terminal in three years. But at least I knew that there is such a
thing as terminal access, and that I can learn (again) to use it, and it
is not extremely difficult. Though it might not be extremely attractive
(visually), not intuitive.)

Two other visually oriented projects follow. First an epub3 produced for
the Stedelijk Museum, which is nice enough, or very nice, yet I can’t
get rid of the impression that I’m looking at something which actually
is a website (which it is of course). Arjen de Jong presents the work of
the BIS Publishers workgroup. Their goal was to explore the possibility
of rich media with highly interactive content. He mentions that iBooks
Author has a crazy user agreement, which is unworkable for a real
publisher: epubs created by iBooks Author may only be sold in the
Appstore, and nowhere else. And it only produces one format. So it’s
unusable professionally. They focused on tablets as the platform to
produce for, as that is where their market is. This choice decided the
use of tools and formats. E-readers, he states, move forward really
slowly, and are basically one-function tools: to read texts. (They are,
and that’s their *forte* too). For anything else (and for reading) we
have laptops and tablets. The publication they worked on – an
interactive ‘book’ on sketching, where the reader or users makes
sketches – would be ridiculous to produce for an e-reader. So it makes
sense.

**More Presentations**

visualMANIAC (<http://visualmaniac.com/>) from Madrid create and sell
image heavy (art) publications. Judging from their websites, they are
much more in an ‘ipad-touch-screen-world’ than some of the earlier
presenters. They have about 1200 publications in the store. They are a
small fish in the pond where Amazon rules, looking for a commercial
format in a world where it still is difficult to have people *pay* for
digital content. Their solution is to work together with institutions,
also offering their services and expertise. The challenge is to survive
and remain independent as an online bookstore for digital content, of
whatever format (HTML5, epub, apps, PDF). The question is: where do you
buy your ‘books’ and ‘magazines’ for the e-reader and iPad? Is there a
(market) possibility for a store? What is the function of a store for
digital content? Of course a small store with a good choice of content
is nicer to browse than Amazon – but wouldn’t I get the PDF or epub
rather directly from the publisher or the author? It’s the old question
of the middle man trying to define a niche.

My colleague at V2\_ Michelle Kasprzak talks about making epubs for the
Blow-up program of V2\_ ([http://www.v2.nl](http://www.v2.nl/)). This
happens next to the printed books that V2\_ is publishing. (Actually
today a new book is published: *Giving & Taking*, edited by Joke Brouwer
and Sjoerd van Tuinen). Why did she bother to make these ebooks, that
delve deeper into the theme of each Blowup – events that had to be
experienced there and then? The old reason: books can be distributed
over space and time, and are easily archived. She dug through the
archive to find archive stuff to republish (with help of me, ‘the
archive guru’ at V2\_), and combined and mixed it with new and
commissioned content. She used the methodology of the Book Sprint – a
masochistic concept, she says with a smile – to create the e-book on
‘the New Aesthetic’. She elaborates on the method of Book Sprints:
getting the group together, the nudging needed from someone who oversees
the process, the choice of a central topic. She calls the room where the
authors who were writing the book on the New Aesthetic in 5 days
humorously ‘the torture room’, and ‘the pressure cooker’.  She organized
a second Book Sprint about the V2\_ long term research project
‘Innovation in Extreme Scenario’s’, with the ambition to make a reader
to explain the topic. The sprint morphed into writing personal essays on
the topic. ‘Write often, distribute widely’ – is how she ends the
presentation. To get the message out there. Focusing on the methodology
of making a book, to speed up the process, is another angle at
electronic book production – though it is not tied to electronic tools.
Even in the 18th Century books were produced and published very, very
fast to react on topical issues.

Matthew So presents the books of Badlands Unlimited
(<http://badlandsunlimited.com/>), founded by the artist Paul Chan. They
see publishing as an experiment, make books ‘in an expanded field’. In
their store they have the choice between IRL (printed), Amazon, or
iPad+iPhone. They are not typical. They work only on Mondays and
Tuesdays, give a 50-50 royalty for authors – which is indeed unheard of.
They are not coders, and rely on the knowledge that they acquired
themselves – a bit of HTML for instance. They started to do e-books
because it would be cheaper to do – and in their experience it worked
out cheaper. The first books were by Paul Chan – just when he was
becoming well-known. Their most successful book – commercially – is the
Marcel Duchamp interview book. Matthew So shows a number of ebooks that
make artistic use, or actually misuse of simple technologies embedded in
for instance iBook Authors. There’s a lot of meta-technological fun.
*How to Download* *a Boyfriend* (with Cory Arcangel, Tony Conrad and
many others) is an example of that – typical of the post-digital
aesthetic, (mis)using the most horrible visuals of contemporary internet
culture. Another example is an iBook with only ads (it became 230 pages
thick). These books typically do not work cross-platform, they are made
for ipads, and are an artistic statement. Publishing these books
cross-platform, he says, is not an issue, since the artistic impulse and
concept comes first. If they can be cross-platform, they will be. All
their ebooks are a good example of what can be done with the available
tools, especially iBook Author, and care less for all of the issues that
the other speakers today mentioned. Maybe you have to be American to
work like this? Is it harder in the Netherlands and Europe, as a small
art publisher, to simply make books that will NOT work on an e-reader,
or your laptop, and only on an Apple device? And tell you customers, ‘no
sorry, it does not work on your machine’? This attitude is relaxing as
well. Maybe we should care less about it. Just make e-books with the
best tools. And when it won’t display anymore on your new reading device
in 6 years time, so what? In the discussion afterwards he admitted that
they did run into quite a few rejections from the iBook store. Sometimes
this concerned censure, sometimes the problem was in scripts they had
used in an iBook – which Apple saw as possible malicious code. But
though he is concerned, he seemed not to be terribly deterred by it.

The Serving Library is a project by Stuart Bailey, David Reinfurt and
Angie Keefer (who presents it here) – they are Dexter Sinister. I have
collaborated with Stuart Bailey in my *Metropolis M* past, and greatly
admire his work. Angie Keefer gives a short introduction and then shows
a long video – *Letter & Spitter.* It is about the 1960s breakthrough
work of Donald Knuth
(<http://www-cs-faculty.stanford.edu/~uno/index.html>), the man behind
Metafont
(<http://www.math.zju.edu.cn/ligangliu/LaTeXForum/TeXBooks/Metafont/MetaFontBook.pdf>)
and TeX.  It’s going into the fundamentals of digital typesetting.
Dexter Sinister made a script to make a single font that is constantly
moving and changing – and this font is used in the video. It’s great,
it’s crazy, it’s what is possible in a computer world, but the video is
too slow for my brain, goes on too long, and I wonder if the message
comes across.

All of this, as Sebastian Lütgert says from the audience at the end of
the discussion of the first day, is like the web of 20 years ago.
Everything that is experimented with, all the changes in workflows, all
the issues, is what we have seen 20 years ago. And he asks: is the book
really the paradigm that we want to look at when we are concerned with
knowledge production? (He says a couple of things more that I am unable
to summarise on the fly). He is right, and it is very strange to see the
middle 1990s re-enacted. One could also argue that this is exactly great
about epubs: all these tools are quite simple, you need just a few days
to understand them and work with them – and sometimes much less than
that. In fact figuring out how to upload them to the App-store can take
more time to figure out. It’s fun to make epubs, but it is pretty
doubtful that it’s the only future of reading and publishing.

**Art Uncreative Art Spam Art**

In the evening it’s time for presentation of projects that perform
publishing, instead of just doing publishing, Shirin Pfisterer, from
Crosslabs/Willem de Kooning Academy, is the first presenter. She made a
plugin for a web browser that saves and scans your reading behaviour –
or at least the bits that you highlight yourself. (Very useful I would
say). *Out of Print* is an installation by design collective sixthirty
that explores the abundance of online news that divides our attention.
(That make us reading more and understanding less). As this one is
actually a real type-setting machine and printing press it’s rather an
art work that asks questions than a pragmatic tool (though of course it
really works). What they print is headlines, looks nice, but not really
connecting to the issue of the abundance of online news. *Collate* is a
later work from them (2013) that looks at the publishing process and is
an experiment in collaborative editing. They made a book using *Collate*
– with 3 essays – printed with Blur.

TraumaWien ([http://traumawien.at](http://traumawien.at/))– presented
here by Lukas Jost Gross does ebook projects, relational publishing, and
organizes events that mix literature with art and acid techno. They
connect, I guess, to a real Viennese tradition. Think Der Wiener Gruppe
(with Ernst Jandl, Konrad Bayer, oswald wiener etc.). They are great, so
please excuse me for not being critical. They published 25 books – but
they only sold about 100 in 4 years. In their crazy projects they
exploit ebooks and on demand printing technology, and use spam. They’ve
automatically generated epubs from Youtube-comments, and employing
Kindle’s direct self-publishing service, uploaded about 2400 such books
automatically to Amazon. Their ‘hack’ was running for three days, before
they were found out. (They stupidly did not use TOR or another way to
hide their IP-address used for uploading). Luckily it was seen before
that by journalists, and so it was picked up, and the story went around
the world. They show what you can do when you really want to exploit the
technologies. They actually sold about 5 of those books. What he is not
referring to is that this project is one of the best examples of
Conceptual Poetry, and Uncreative Writing (see the book by Kenneth
Goldsmith – of UBUweb –, and the anthology *Against Expression* by Craig
Dworkin & Goldsmith), which has gained quite some attention in poetry
and theory circles in the past years. (In the Netherlands composer/poet
Samuel Vriezen is into this). Though TraumaWien holds probably – as
befits Austrian – the most extreme position. (And yes, TraumaWien have
the PDFs of these book up at their site:
<http://traumawien.at/stuff/texts/>.) They also have a great scheme to
get readers: get the torrent with all the new German epubs, contaminate
all the 24.000 epubs, and re-upload. Keep on seeding, making sure people
take your torrent. And all of those readers who think they’re going to
read the new Daniel Kehlmann book for ‘free’, will get the TraumaWien
version.

‘That’s a tough act to follow’, says Oliver Wise from the Present Group,
who is now presenting with Eleanor Hanson Wise. They show The People’s
Ebook, and try to answer the question why it is framed as a tool for
artists. The answer is first in the social scene they are themselves
part of, and secondly because getting artists involved into making
epubs, is a method of pushing the technology further. Their historical
example is Sonia Landy Sheridan’s residence at 3M’s Color Research lab
in 1971 and 1976. Furthermore artists they know do publish, but are
usually not technological savvy, and do not use epub – so having such a
tool for that scene, is useful.

The last presentation I see is by Greyscales’ Manuel Schmalstieg (see
<http://greyscalepress.com>)  – *Black Holes in the Galaxy*. He starts
with the idea of the flip-flop: going from digital to analog and back.
He made a couple of printed editions, sometimes pirated – for instance
Neal Stephenson’s essay from Wired on the undersea cable, with new
illustrations. He aggregated a novel from texts written by various ghost
writers. He made the edition ‘In Conversation with Julian Assange.’ Some
of these book remained undercover, as they were pirate editions, and
rights were not acquired. His most successful publication is a book with
transcriptions of talks by Jacob Appelbaum, – a book which can be added
to every time a new talk is transcribed. He ends with on overview of
spam publishing – which very nicely complements the presentation by
TraumaWien.



# Off the Press – Report Day II {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [ariealtena](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/ariealtena/ "Posts by ariealtena"),
May 27, 2014 at 9:28 pm.

**Tools and Workshops**

The second day of Off the Press starts with workshops. I decide to go to
the workshop about pandoc first, as it promises to be about a way of
working with text that I am not used to, but have started to like. When
I started to use computers, in 1991 there was already Word and that is
what I used for writing. At the same time I still sometimes had to use
command line tools and learned about 20 Unix-commands. Through the years
I’ve met people who championed the use of emacs, LaTEX, Multimarkdown or
pandoc. But I have never really figured out how to work in that
‘paradigm’. First thing to understand is that pandoc is basically a very
powerful converting tool. Pandoc is not an environment, but a step in a
chain, a step in the workflow. It just converts. And it won’t solve the
problems of converting visual design to a digital format. It is based on
using Markdown, a simple markup language that uses asterisks, square
brackets, underscores. I have always found it easier to write HTML
markup, than this type of markup, but it is even simpler than writing
HMTL-tags. The idea is that the plain text file shows the structure in a
human readable format but is ready for computer consumption at the same
time. What you see is what you get – but in a different way. An
interesting remark is made – I forget who made it: ‘Word and InDesign
are not *basic* tools of the trade – though most people now have grown
up thinking they are. They are very *specific* tools.’ And it’s true
that especially editors can take advantage of the knowledge of markup
languages to create better, cleaner source texts… There’s some panic and
chaos in the workshop, as the difference in competence is really big.
Some participants use the terminal mode all the time, others have never
seen a command line interface before, let alone worked with it. There is
also a bit of a clash between those who think that people should be
empowered to use tools themselves and acquire what they think is
necessary basic knowledge, versus people who do not have such ‘basic
knowledge’, consider such knowledge to be ‘technical’, and who, let’s
face it, will probably never use these tools themselves anyway. In the
middle is a majority who at least would like to get a taste of the
‘basic knowledge’.



After the lunch break I have a look at  the other two workshops. Two
groups of each 20 participants (the maximum) are working concentrated.
In the SuperGlue workshop (<http://superglue.it/>) all have just
installed, or tried to install, the SuperGlue package, thus creating a
local network of mini servers. (The SuperGlue website states:
‘SuperGlue’s mini-server provides full control of your personal data by
enabling you to run and maintain your server at home. This means you can
better protect and share important information, directly with those whom
you want to share it with. So your privacy is in your hands.’) Danja
Vasiliev, one of the workshop tutors and creators of SuperGlue asks:
‘who has got it working?’ About everybody has it working. When I check
my Airport it sees six SuperGlue networks. Again, I realise I should
finally learn how to set up my own server, that I should learn this
little bit of command line tweaking, so I can run WordPress on my own
machine, and have all the other useful tools at my fingertips. It really
is basic knowledge. A lot of it is hardly ‘technical’ – but it’s in a
different computer paradigm, that feels very far removed from the shiny
‘intuitive’ interfaces.

Megan Hoogenboom leads the workshop in which the participants try to
make an epub form a work of visual poetry. About everyone is playing
around with what I call good old-fashioned HTML: writing tags. It looks
like they are having good fun with HTML and CSS.

Both the SuperGlue workshop and the visual poetry workshop show that
it’s fun to work with tools that empower you as user, that give you the
feeling of being in control and creating something – instead of
consuming nice interfaces that mostly control you. (I would say that
working, well playing, with an iPad mostly give the user the feeling of
being controlled by the interface, not of being in control. Using an
iPad certainly does not enhance the feeling that one can make something
oneself, apart from using services that offer heavily pre-formatted ways
of creation. Sure, the touch screen can be great to control sound
output, and it can be nice for gaming, but that is another
thing). It’s an old point, but it stays relevant.

Back in the days – roughly 1997 to 2000 – I taught basic HTML (and
writing to the web and so forth) at Mediamatic. At the time it was still
considered ‘handy’ for editors and designers – who actually already were
working in Dreamweaver and were doing Flash – to know some HTML. (Of
course the question was always raised: why should we know these tags,
when you can do the same visually in a WISYWIG editor?) Who, apart from
the ‘nerds’, maintained their websites doing HTML in the 21^st^ century?
Maybe some artists who liked the simplicity of HTML. Some academics. The
great thing is that a website made with simple HTML in 1995 still
displays fine in any browser. I think there is a basic, simple fun in
creating something with one’s own hands. Maybe the result doesn’t look
as slick as other websites, but it will work fine, and you have control
over almost every step.

Also in the visual poetry workshop I mostly see smiling faces. They
generate an epub in the end – using a command line tool. And that’s
great. There is fun in making epubs. (Michael Murtaugh told me that the
pandoc workshop, which started quite chaotic, also ended with a great
feeling of relief from the side of the participants, when they create an
epub-output with pandoc with a simple command.)

**Libraries**

‘Mp3 was not made big by the music industry, it was made big by file
sharing, started by hackers. Netflix makes it decisions about
programming by analysing Pirate Bay downloads. Maybe,’ Florian Cramer
says, because he’s doing the introduction again, ‘we should have started
the conference with this last panel on underground publishing.’ The
underground file sharing of books is, at least in Europe, much larger
than the retail market of e-books. Artists have been very active in this
scene from the beginning according to Florian Cramer. It also exists
much longer than the retail market. Some of it is illegal ‘sharing’ of
books, but not all of it. Here at the conference *Bibliothecha* is
running on a little local file server. It appears as an open wireless
device on one’s computer and allows you to download books that people
have put there. There’s also a website and a public repository – at
[http://bibliotecha.info](http://bibliotecha.info/).

Sebastian Lütgert, the next speaker, ran a repository of philosophical
and activist and underground texts ‘back in the days’. (I still should
have a lot of those files somewhere on a harddisk, the start of my
digital library together with downloads from Project Gutenberg). His
talk is about ‘what do you do with your books’. What do you do with the
gigantic amounts of unsorted PDFs and epubs that you have on your hard
disk, often not properly named. He assumes we all have such collections
– do we? He does not like Calibre as a management tool and reader.
Calibre (<http://calibre-ebook.com/>) – in the first place a converter
for epubs and comparable formats – seems to be the tool of choice of
many. Though I wonder how many users in the iPad/iPhone/Adobe universe
know of it. Sebastian Lütgert main question is: how should
library-software function, what is a good ebook-management tool? With
support from Constant vzw (<http://www.constantvzw.org/site/>) in
Brussels such software is developed: openmedialibrary
(<http://openmedialibrary.com/#about>). He shows how it works in a web
browser. It allows browsing the library of peers, and transferring books
from there to one’s own computer.

We’re in ‘the underground’ here so we’re assuming that we’re dealing
with free content and books that people have bought and like to share
with friends… But the topic now is not how the digital is or should be
changing society, culture and the economy. We’re looking at how the
tools work in practice. Tools like this one are important, they are an
activist ‘cog’ in the ‘machinery’. They change the function of the
public library too – and public libraries, at least in Europe, are
thinking about these transformations. Here we get into an endless and
endlessly interesting discussion, which is a topic for another
conference. It is self-evident that this is about sharing knowledge,
which is a basis of our civilization. If I sound a bit ironic, this is
unintentional. I agree with the philosophy to build these tools – it is
an active and activist impetus to change society.

Calibre by the way also has a function to set up a content server, and
can connect to other users. I think Calibre is a decent viewer, it’s
great for conversion (Mobi to epub…), and can be used to produce ebooks.
The main downside to Calibre, for me, – except for the fact that it adds
its own code to your converted epubs – is that its interface is not
attractive at all.

After Sebastian Lütgert it’s over to the Marcell Mars – hacker,
activist, researcher. He is expert in book sharing and book hacking, and
is, or was, actively involved in creating code for Calibre. (Actually he
has just been banned from the developer forum). He wrote a sharing tool
for Calibre:
[memoryoftheworld.org/public-library](http://memoryoftheworld.org/public-library)).
He says: aesthetics and usability are less important than social
interaction. Calibre might be ugly – he says it’s ugly – and not the
easiest tool, but it has thousands of users. He wants to make Calibre a
political project. He mentions the property regime and intellectual
property are a huge problem. They sure are. He also rants against the
technological problems – the asymmetry in the network, laptops that send
requests for data, but never send data, though they could. He is so
right in that. The internet we have created is a far cry to what it
could have been in the dreams of 30, 20 or even 10 years ago. But most
importantly Mars wants to connect again to the idea of the public
library. The public library as the democratic dream of access to
knowledge. He’s from Croatia where in 1991 books were burned because
they were in Cyrillic, in Serbian, and/or communist. And the book
scanning project at MAMA in Zagreb was a way of resurrecting that burned
library. He’s passionate about the idea of the public library, and a
passionate speaker with his Karl Marx-beard, using the word struggle
quite a bit. I think he is very right in his passionate plea for the
public library, and his plea against the development of electronic
reading as ‘streaming’, licensing temporary access to a file, where the
whole reading behaviour is controlled. In between he advises us to read
*Paper Machines*, Markus Krajewski’s book on the card catalogue. The
issue he raises is that of having power in the control over access to
knowledge, control over the index to knowledge. He pleads to not let
Google take over a total control over this index, that we need to retain
the index of the public library. He also pleas for retaining the
function of a librarian – as a person, a human being – and not hand over
the control over the index to computer engineers and algorithms. There
are many points in his presentation that deserve a detailed
think-through and discussion.

Dusan Barok of monoskop (<http://monoskop.org>) is the last speaker.
He delves into the history of reading and publishing, going back to
manuscripts and scrolls. While he talks an image of one of the earliest
Greek manuscripts of Plato’s *Phaedrus* is shown, with the title
‘Communing Texts’. Referencing is his main topic. How to refer to
passages in an ebook? Pagination – a historical, ‘technological’
invention that came about through the development of the codex – is
hardly ever mentioned in the discussion of ebooks. Dusan compares two
traditions of referencing: the academic one (pointing to a specific
passage in a text) and hyperlinking between sections of a website
(through using anchors). He would like to see the possibility to
digitally augment references in scanned printed books, as well as the
possibility to link to any passage in a digital text – regardless of
whether there is an anchor in the HTML. He says that this means looking
at digital text as a continuous line of data (which is the materiality
of digital text anyway). Enabling referencing between texts is
important, as in such a way a community of texts can arise.

During the discussion Joost Kircz repeats that we indeed need
referencing inside texts – and that this still does not exist.
Interestingly Sebastian Lütgert says that it is probably easy to make
such references inside electronic publications – and sketches the
concept how it could work. Sounds simple. Joost Kircz says: well let’s
make it, because this does not exist, and we have been wanting it for
over 30 years now.  (I think: doesn’t this go back to Ted Nelson’s ideas
on transclusion – and that was very problematic?) Marcel Mars thinks
that any computer student could solve it. But it’s another question if
such a standard would be used. (And making sure it becomes a standard is
difficult).

Marcell Mars ends one of his answers with that he hates the idea of the
underground in the American and UK sense – ‘I’m not underground, fuck
you’. He is very right – when you would consider all our book sharing
(which in the current technical implementation means downloading) as
being the new implementation of the public library. (And not as building
a private library).

**Toolkit**

So, is there a toolkit? There is no finished toolkit yet. There is the
repository with tools
<http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/github/>. There is also by
now a good insight in the various workflows used by small publishers,
artists, writers, self-publishers and organizations. There is an
overview of the pro’s and con’s of different tools. There is an overview
of how all of this relates to the larger context of publishing, and to
reading and sharing behaviours in online and offline culture. There is
probably no perfect toolkit that fits every need. What I personally
learned, is that pretty much everybody has been trying out different
ways of making epubs that are good enough to bring into the world, and
that there’s almost always something that has to be done ‘by hand’ as
well, some tweaking and correction. Every method has advantages and
disadvantages, and what fits a certain project depends on a variety of
factors: the source text, the editorial process, the goal of the
publication, the envisioned market or reading group, the available time…
I think a progression has been made thanks to this project and the three
conferences. There is also progression in knowing that a lot concerns
really very basic stuff – very basic stuff.

The attraction of epubs for me lies in the fun of making something which
is simple, which you can do yourself (just as well as any large
institution). It’s in the joy of making – and also there is a parallel
with web design of the middle 1990s. In that respect I have gone from
amazement over the fact that such a fuss was being made of ‘e-books’, to
a joy of making epubs.

(For pictures see: <https://www.flickr.com/photos/networkcultures/>)



# Michelle Kasprzak – The eBook as a Vehicle for Re-dissemination and Creation {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [jakubdutka](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/jakubdutka/ "Posts by jakubdutka"),
May 27, 2014 at 6:48 pm.



![](imgs/14058080799_ac4cbe88fd_z.jpg)
Michelle Kasprzak



Michelle Kasprzak, curator at [V2\_, Institute for the Unstable
Media](http://v2.nl/) in Rotterdam, introduced participants of Off the
Press to the creation of an e-book series aimed to complement the events
run by V2\_. Michelle begun by briefly outlining the history and
activities of the institute.



![](imgs/leadImage.jpg)
Vughterstraat 234 (short: V2\_) in ‘s-Hertogenbosch, the first abode.




The Institute for the Unstable Media started in 1981 as an artist
collective in ‘s-Hertogenbosch, the Netherlands. The theoretical
principles of V2\_ were laid down in 1987 with the “Manifesto for
Unstable Media”, which grew out of dissatisfaction with the status quo
in the visual arts at the time. In 1994, V2\_ moved to its current
location in the city centre of Rotterdam.

The idea behind the e-book series was to create ‘legacy objects’ for
those who could not attend the actual events run by the institute. The
events in question include [DEAF – Dutch Electronic Art
Festival](http://v2.nl/events/deaf), [Test\_Lab
series](http://v2.nl/events/test_lab_series),
[Blowup\_series](http://v2.nl/events/blowup), as well as
[others.](http://v2.nl/events) Regarding the institute’s style, Michelle
stated that their two main approaches – mixing old and new content, and
reframing – allows V2\_ to remain agile and be flexible to adjust to the
hot topic of the time.

![](imgs/Bez-tytu%C5%82u.jpg)

[Book Sprints](http://www.booksprints.net/) – time-limited (5 days)
collaborative book writing. Michelle is responsible for curating
participating groups and choosing participants from different
backgrounds to come together as an efficient writing group. Michelle
remarked that Book Sprints are like weddings : they bring best and worst
in people.



![](imgs/Mike.jpg)
dhr. M.J. Dieter during Book Sprint



 

 

 

Contact Michelle Kasprzak :

 

You can find a PDF of her original presentation here: [Presentation
Michelle
Kasprzak](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S4_02_MichelleKasprzak.pdf)

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562225](imgs/477911262_640.jpg)



# Matthew So: Badlands Unlimited: We Make Books in an Expanded Field {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [patricia](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/murtaugh/ "Posts by patricia"),
May 27, 2014 at 1:54 pm.

![](imgs/so.jpg)

Matthew So handles sales, distribution and inventory operations at
Badlands Unlimited. Founded in 2010 Badlands Unlimited publishes
e-books, paper books, prints and artist works in digital and print
forms, and even one book in stone, on a range of topics that do not
cover specific genres. Their publications, So explained, render the
dissolving distinction between books, files and artworks. They have no
plan to start producing Moocs anytime soon, as “Ebooks are cheap and
easy to make.” The basic aesthetic of their press is “whatever we can do
on our own” as there are no developers or programmers working for
Badlands.



Badlands Unlimited is run by the founder and artist Paul Chan and three
staff member amongst which So himself. Chan had the ambition to start a
press of his own, but was at loss as to what kind of books to publish
apart from his own. He decided to publish the work of the artists he
admired, starting with the poetry of Yvonne Rainer, that turned out to
be one of their first publications.

The catalogue of Badlands Unlimited’s publication is small and
remarkable and has included a .gif-filled e-book as an art-advertising
White Pages, titled AD BOOK. AD BOOK consist entirely of ads for
magazines made by various artists and art institutions. “That book paid
for itself before it was on sale.” It is in part a response to the New
York art scene “which seems to be concerned only with networking,
marketing and money.”

*Hell Tree* by digital media artist Petra Cortright is another example
of their extraordinary books. Hell Tree is made up of writings by
Cortright and screenshots of Cortright’s desktop. Countless open widows
with texts and images are juxtaposed; the desktop of a life saturated by
media and media images. Hell Tree displays Cortright’s thoughts during
the course of her workdays; to-do lists interlace with poems, texts and
images pile and are superimposed.

[Book trailer Hell Tree](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tQmRa3DvAsA)

*On Democracy* by Saddam Hussein is an English translation of three 
essays on the purpose of democracy written by the late Iraqi dictator in
his student days. Chan was gifted the essays and later obtained the
rights for the Ebook. *On Democracy* shows the interest of Badlands
Unlimited to press books that are unusual to say the least.

Other publications of Badlands Unlimited include:

*The Afternoon Interviews* – a series of formerly unpublished interviews
with audio fragments of Marcel Duchamp by The New Yorker’s art critic
Calvin Tomkins.

*Think Like Clouds* – a coffee table book composed of an accumulation of
drawings, notes  and scribbles by the art curator and art critic Hans
Ulrich Obrist.

*How to Download a Boyfriend –* a group art show turned into an
interactive Ebook.

[Book trailer How to Download a
Boyfriend](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZrJuBT0VxnA)

Discussions on the book publishing, So argues, should not be about what
the book is as an object or what it is not. “Books always evolve and
change due to changes in it production and distribution methods and
technology.” Badlands, So explained, embraces the fact that the book
form has entered a digital life and advised bookmakers to explore and
seek out what the new purposes of a book can be. The possibilities seem
to be Unlimited indeed.

You can find a PDF of his original presentation here (unfortunately
without the GIF’s): [Presentation Matthew
So](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S4_03_MatthewSo.pdf)

[Badlands Unlimited website](http://badlandsunlimited.com)

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562223](imgs/477911432_640.jpg)



# Loes Sikkes: Highlights – EPub Personalizer {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [patricia](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/murtaugh/ "Posts by patricia"),
May 27, 2014 at 1:43 pm.

![](imgs/loes.jpg)

The Rotterdam-based graphic designer Loes Sikkes of Medamo, consortium
partner of the Digital Publishing Toolkit, presents the Highlights
research project on which she worked together with nai010 Publishers and
PUNTPIXEL.

Sikkes observed that digital versions of hard copy publications are
often not more than that: a digital, oftentimes a PDF format, of the
analogue publication. That is, the advantages and possibilities a
digital environment has to offer are left unused. How can you avoid
resorting to a 1 on 1 translation of an analogue to a digital
environment?



The starting point of this research project were the *Highlights* and
*Reflections* publications of the nai010 publishing house. Highlights is
composed of images of the highlights of the collection of Amsterdam’s
modern art museum, the Stedelijk Museum, and Reflections is an addition
to this photo catalogue and consists of a series of essays on the art
pieces. The question was: how could they make use of the advantages
e-publishing has to offer, tackle the difficulties, and make it work for
the average visitor of the Stedelijk Museum.

The majority of the visitors of the Stedelijk Museum are 50 years and
older tourists with smartphones. This is the visitor and the device they
had in mind when developing the Highlights Personalizer Application.

The application is optimized for iPhone and iPad and can be used to
prepare for a visit to the museum or as a personal reference, a
personalized catalogue of your visit to the Museum. Personalizing and
filtering are the key aspects of the application. Using the Highlights
Personalizer the user can make a selection of his or her personal
favorites of the museum’s Highlights. With the Highlights Personalizer
the user composes the content, it can decide what kind and how much
information is stored. Based on a large amount of content provided by
the Stedelijk Museum, the user can make a compilation by means of
several selection and filtering criteria and download his personal
Highlights with additional information on the artwork or the artist.

The structure of this open source application is usable for all kinds of
topics. Data collections containing multiple levels of information can
be used. However, there are still some difficulties they need to solve,
for example:

-   What should be arranged to keep the content up to date and how will
    it be managed?
-   How to deal with the copyrights issues on the used images and
    information?

Over the next coming months they hope to solve these issues.

You can find a PDF of her original presentation here: [Presentation Loes
Sikkes](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S3_04_LoesSikkes.pdf)

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562365](imgs/477910646_640.jpg)



# Joaquín González – Setting up an art digital book store, or ‘Working out how to do something is better than waiting for a magic formula’ {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [jakubdutka](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/jakubdutka/ "Posts by jakubdutka"),
May 27, 2014 at 9:18 pm.



![](imgs/14058050377_2830bffb1d_z.jpg)
Joaquín González



Joaquín González is the executive director of
[visualMANIAC,](http://visualmaniac.com/)a Madrid-based, independent
distributor of digital books and magazines. visualMANIAC specialises in
publications from the domain of art, design, photography and
architecture. Their books are accessible on iPads, Androids and
computers.

As Joaquín remarked at the very beginning of the session, when he bought
an iPad back in 2011, he was fascinated by it, yet the market of digital
publications he could access left a lot to be desired. While some
magazines had already begun experimenting with apps, in the field of
visual culture and arts there was nothing. The founders of Visual Maniac
decided to fill in the niche and explore the possibilities that the
digital publishing offered.

Having received positive feedback on their plans from many separate
publishers, Joaquín and his friends decided to put their plans into
practice. The first obstacle they encountered, however, was the choice
of format for their publications. Out of all the formats available, they
chose PDF for its well-rounded features and the preservation of the
visual layout (as opposed to the austerity and re-flowability of EPUB).
Preserving the unique nature of each publication, as well as the high
quality of pictures, was of essence. While PDF clearly has its
limitations, mainly its ‘flatness’, team at Visual Maniac worked to
modify it to allow for ‘enhanced’ content like video and sound links,
yet this extended form is not yet embraced by publishers.



![](imgs/14244322224_2d120f688b_z.jpg)
Joaquín González explaining the tough choices Visual Maniac had to make



visualMANIAC clients can add their purchases to their accounts and
access them from any device. On top of that, users can take advantage of
online reader and tablet apps, however the content is not available on
e-readers and phones.Visual Maniac collaborates with over 100 publishers
and offers over 12000 publications in their catalogue.

Another obstacle Joaquín and friends encountered in their work is that
publishers are constantly overworked and lack the time to involve in
innovative attempts. Subsequently, the ownership of copyrights is
stopping some publishers from moving to digital formats. Furthermore,
publishers desire a perfect product, one that would be cheap (or,
ideally, free) to produce and easy to use on a variety of devices. The
situation on the market is not easy either, because, as Joaquín
explained, it is challenging to attract potential readers and it’s even
harder to make them buy. As a solution to the harsh market
situation, Visual Maniac started offering its services to institutions.

visualMANIAC wants to become an international ‘go-to’ publisher for
everyone who is interested in digital publications in the field of arts.
Their plans include incorporating new formats, like apps and HTML.
Joaquín’s final remark addressed the specificity of current mediascape,
which is highly heterogenous and, as a result, any successful enterprise
must provide content in diverse formats so users can enjoy it on a
variety of devices.

You can find a PDF of his original presentation here: [Presentation
Jouquin
Gonzales](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S4_01_JouquinGonzales.pdf)

Check out visualMANIAC’s blog : http://visualmaniac.com/visualmag

Contact Teresa and Joaquín :joaquin@visualmaniac.comteresa@visualmaniac.com

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562226](imgs/477910696_640.jpg)



# Florian Cramer: Electronic publishing in the arts – what works and what doesn’t {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [irina](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/irina/ "Posts by irina"),
May 27, 2014 at 10:30 am.

Florian Cramer announced the soon-to-be-released Digital Publishing
Toolkit – the results of a two year project with publishers and
designers that taps into their practical experiences and difficulties in
developing a number of pilot e-book projects. It furthermore addresses
ways in which publishers can change their internal ways of working so
that releasing one publication simultaneously for print, web, epub and
other formats becomes less painful and more efficient.

According to Cramer, digital publishing promised writers, designers and
publishers exceptional visuals and interactivity combined with easy
distribution and low costs. Examples such as [Art
Circle](http://eu.art.com/asp/landing/artcircles/default.asp) – an
impressive application that brings entire art collections to readers via
beautiful visuals, sound and interactivity – support this ideal.

![](imgs/Florian-Cramer.jpg)

*photo credits: Martin Risseeuw*



So what isn’t currently working in e-publishing? Reality is, argues
Cramer, that most arts and design publishers are small, have low budgets
and can not maintain electronic publications that will continuous
technical updates. Developing interactive applications would require
those publishers to effectively become indie game designers – which is
not workable in a world where books appear in editions between 500 and
1500. To complicate things, digital publishing is still a market in
development. Print book publishing is in a deep crisis (for example,
Rotterdam’s biggest – and only remaining general – bookstore recently
went into bankruptcy) while there is no real mass market for e-books yet
in continental Europe and the Netherlands. What publishers need is
sustainable forms of electronic publishing. What is first needed, he
says, is identification of exact needs. During the Digital Publishing
Toolkit project, Cramer identified the following needs are: platform
independence (the possibility to easily publish content everywhere –
phone, tablet, PC, e-readers), stable formats, and optimized workflows
that simplify the production process.

There are some important choices to be made in e-publishing, Cramer
argued. One example are publishers who want to publish work as e-books
that should better be on the web – but their only reason for choosing
the e-book format is that they haven’t figured out how to monetize web
content. In such cases, e-books and the ePub format are pseudo-solutions
to problems that really lie elsewhere. In other cases, one should not
underestimate the importance of offline reading. You can’t even read an
online electronic publication in the high speed train from Amsterdam to
Rotterdam with its many tunnels and connectivity disruptions.

Some practical issues were brought forth as well. One is the support of
the epub standard on e-readers and e-reading software. It is currently
as bad and as inconsistent as the support of web standards in the web
browsers of the 1990s. Another issue is that software workflows in the
editorial process need rethinking. (Cramer mentioned the Microsoft/Adobe
legacy as unworkable). The technically ideal solution is the document
format XML as a basis from which documents can be automatically
translated into desktop publishing files, web pages and e-books, but in
most cases, XML is too complex and technically demanded for non-IT
companies. A pragmatic solution is to use simplified document markup
languages like MultiMarkdown, which are easy to write and read, and a
good basis for automatic file format conversions, too. Unlike HTML,
which could also be used for this purpose, MultiMarkdown has an
unambiguous syntax that can’t easily lead to incompatibilities when
several people have worked on the same file.

Cramer further discussed costs, a rather sensitive aspect: “the promise
that the electronic publishing is cheaper is a false promise”, he
argues. That is why it becomes important to optimize workflows in the
production process.

Ending his talk, Cramer has an important question for the audience: why
do publishers tend to stick to the traditional formats of publishing
even when they move to e-publishing? He gave the example of poetry
books. Traditionally, poetry is published as poetry volumes because it
is the only economical way of printing, distributing and selling it.
With e-publishing however, it is possible to sell single poems. The same
is true for exhibition catalogues. He gave the recent example of
Stedelijk Museum, the Dutch contemporary art museum. It would have made
no sense to publish its 200-page collection highlights catalogue as one
e-book. But e-publishing makes it possible to turn each monographic
chapter on an individual artwork into a mini-epub of its own, and to
allow readers to choose what they want to explore and read.

The same essential questioning of formats concerns anthologies and
periodicals. Cramer gave the example of the Dutch contemporary art and
theory magazine [Open](http://onelineopen.org/) which successfully
transformed from a print periodical into a web platform. The overall
point here is that traditional publishing formats often don’t follow
some necessity dictated by their content, but rather the technical
necessities of print production, distribution and retail. Since
e-publishing obsoletes many of these necessities, it urges publishers to
rethink those basic formats – rather than simply making books with
multimedia additions.

You can find a PDF of his original presentation here: [Presentation
Florian
Cramer](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S3_01_FlorianCramer.pdf)

*Florian Cramer is a reader for new media in art and design at
Hogeschool Rotterdam, and director of the Creating 010 centre for
practice-oriented research in support of creative professions. He also
is dean of the Parallel University of WORM, the Rotterdam-based
Institute of Avantgardistic Recreation. Last publication: Anti-Media,
NAi Publishers, 2013; What Is Post-Digital?, A Peer-Review Journal
About, 2014*.

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562331](imgs/477910409_640.jpg)



# Elizabeth Castro: CatalanTalk – Publishing multilingual interviews, from Twitter to ebooks to paper {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [irina](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/irina/ "Posts by irina"),
May 27, 2014 at 10:20 am.

![](imgs/Liz-Castro.jpg)

[Elizabeth Castro](https://twitter.com/lizcastro) kicked off the second
session of the conference by introducing herself as a computer book
writer. [She is the author of several
guides](http://www.elizabethcastro.com/) on how to create webpages and
epubs by working with tools like HTML, XML, InDesign and CSS.

In this talk, however, Castro showed how she applies this know-how to a
topic close to her heart: the independence of Catalonia. She is an
active contributor to Catalan online news portal
[VilaWeb](http://www.vilaweb.cat/english) and has recently moved to
Barcelona. When she first started the collaboration there, she noticed
how hard it was to spread the word about Catalonia’s struggles
internationally. The reason was the use of one language (Catalan) and
only posting news on the website. That is when she decided to carry
interviews with Catalan activists, researchers, politicians, writers and
artists on Twitter, in multiple languages, using the social network as a
live chat. After this, she came up with the idea of publishing the
interviews as electronic collections.

The interviews take place in real time, Castro explained, and people can
follow and comment on them, therefore creating a new space for
discussions. Each interview has the hashtag \#CatalanTalk and another
one for the local language (for example, \#CatalanTalkEn). Each
interview is translated in multiple languages by a team of volunteers.
The interviews are further embedded on the Twitter stream on VilaWeb’s
website.

There are challenges to this method, Castro also pointed out. First, she
needs to decide the exact time to have the interview each week, so that
followers know when it takes place. This is particularly burdened by the
different times zones of interviewees. Another challenge is that both
her and the interviewee need to type extremely fast – the interviews
last maximum one hour, because that is how long they expect followers to
tap in.

The main benefit of this method is the global reach of her interviews,
facilitated by the use of hash tags, comments, re-tweets and
translations.

There are also limitations to Twitter interviews, she warned. For
example, interviewees need to have an account and to be familiar with
Twitter in the first place. Furthermore, they might often get very
heated on the topic, which makes the interview hard to moderate.
Finally, not everyone can follow the interviews on Twitter (either
because they do not have an account or simply because they read on other
formats). While Castro regularly publishes the interviews on VilaWeb,
she recently decided to turn them into e-publications too.

How does she do that? The flow of publishing starts with archiving all
the tweets via [Storify](https://storify.com/). Then, Castro explained,
she exports them from Storify to XML. At this point, there might be a
lot of irrelevant tweets in the data. In order to extract the clean
interview, she uses XSLT to filter the XML file by giving it certain
commands (such as to delete all re-tweets or comments and keep only the
original interview). After clearing it up, she imports the XML file in
InDesign, where the text loses all the unnecessary metadata and becomes
readable text. Finally, she proof reads and copy-edits the text, as
typos and grammar mistakes are common when writing so fast. She also
sometimes edits abbreviations and typos (these are inevitably used on
Twitter, given the 140 characters limit) but restrains from changing her
interviewees’ writing styles or tone of voice. After all these steps,
she exports the file to EPub, which can also be printed and distributed.

Reflecting on the idea of having liveTwitter interviews and then
transforming them into e-publications, Castro believes one can truly
take advantage of the ephemeral, but highly interactive and engaging
nature of Twitter conversations and transform them into concrete
literature by means of e-publishing.

You can find a PDF of her original presentation here: [Presentation
Elizabeth
Castro](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S2_01_ElizabethCastro.pdf)

*Photo credits: Martin Risseeuw*

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562278](imgs/477909420_640.jpg)



# Arjen de Jong: Sketching skills {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [irina](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/irina/ "Posts by irina"),
May 27, 2014 at 3:31 pm.

![](imgs/Arjen-de-Jong-demo-0.png)

![](imgs/Arjen-de-Jong.jpg)

De Jong is a visual designer for design agency
[Essense](http://essense.eu/about/) and a member of [BIS
Publishers](http://www.bispublishers.nl/), both located in Amsterdam. He
attended the conference “Off the Press: Electronic Publishing in the
Arts” as a representative of the latter and shared the production
process of two of their recent e-publications.

The first case study he presented was the translation of the best seller
book titled “[Sketching: The
basics](http://www.amazon.com/Sketching-The-Basics-2nd-printing/dp/9063692536)”
by Roselien Steur an Koos Eissen into an e-publication (app) that design
students and creative professionals would find easier to learn from. The
desired output was for the e-publication to be highly interactive and
visual while allowing the readers to choose between different narratives
(linear reading versus fragmented, personalized reading). The idea was
to focus on the book’s purpose – to teach “the basics” of sketching.
With the app (soon to be launched), design students can choose if they
want a step-by-step teaching process or dive directly into specific
skills. They can also choose to read on theory or practice bits, or jump
to industry experts’ highlights.

This is how the demo of the app looks like:

![Arjen de Jong demo](imgs/Arjen-de-Jong-demo.png)

 

 

 

 

 

The other case study was translating the book “[Think like a lawyer,
don’t act like
one](http://www.amazon.com/Think-Like-Lawyer-Dont-Act/dp/9063693079)” by
Aernoud Bourdrez into an electronic publication (EPUB3). In this case,
they opted for a neat, flat design in order to stay as close as possible
to the printed version. In either cases, BIS Publishers followed the
same workflow, which De Jong shared with the audience.

He first stressed out that one of the most important steps in the
workflow is knowing what you’re looking for in the upcoming product.
This means researching your target audience: who are they? What devices
do they use? How do they engage with reading and exploring? What is the
best format for them? Are they permanently online? etc. These insights
further dictate what type of content is more suitable (flat text or rich
media? Linear or fragmented narratives?).

Then, the authors, designers and publishers (more often than not, one
can play all three roles) choose the design and publishing tools to work
with. They can opt for either open tools (a wide range of developer
tools, [Baker Framework](http://www.bakerframework.com/),
[Sourcefabric](http://www.sourcefabric.org/)) or proprietary tools
([InDesign](http://www.adobe.com/products/indesign.html), [iBooks
Author](http://www.apple.com/ibooks-author/),
[LayerGloss](https://www.layergloss.com/),
[PressMatrix](http://www.pressmatrix.de/)).

Second, a decision on format is required: would ePub, iBook, Mobipocket
or a stand-alone app better suit the purpose? De Jong argues in favor of
open, flexible and sustainable formats; in his experience CSS, EPUB,
Hybrid and the likes work best.

The third step is picking a distributor: iTunes, App Store, Newsstand,
Google Play, Amazon App Market or indirect distribution. When choosing a
distributor, De Jong warns about the terms and conditions that apply
with proprietary distributors like Google, Amazon or iTunes, as they
often require the right to exclusive distribution. Once the
distributor(s) is chosen, publishers opt for the platform, such as IOS,
Android or Kindle.

Finally, the product is made available on a device: iPad, Android Tablet
or Kindle.

At BIS Publishers, De Jong works mostly with rich content (interactive,
audio, video, fragmented narratives) and thus prefers tablets and apps.
His checklist contains full color screen, high resolution, sound, and
internet connection. There are further technical aspects to be
considered on the long run, like the fact that updating an app is easier
and cheaper than buying a new e-reader. Different desired outcomes
dictate the use of different tools and platforms.

You can find a PDF of his original presentation here: [Presentation
Arjen de
Jong](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/06/S3_05_ArjendeJong.pdf)

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562364](imgs/477910652_640.jpg)



# André Castro – “Bibliotecha” {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [jakubdutka](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/jakubdutka/ "Posts by jakubdutka"),
May 27, 2014 at 9:59 pm.



![](imgs/800px-Bibliotecha_Book.jpg)
Bibliotecha



The last session of Off the Press was opened by André Castro, who
introduced participants to the Bibliotecha project. André is a sound
artist from Lisbon, currently living in Rotterdam. He completed the
Master’s program of Media Design and Communication at the [Piet Zwart
Institute](http://pzwart.wdka.nl/home/) in 2013, and graduated in 2007
from the Sonic Arts BA program at Middlesex University. He developed
Bibliotecha in collaboration with : [Yoana Buzova
,](http://oyoana.com/)Lasse van den Bosch Christensen, [Max
Dovey,](http://www.maxdovey.com/)[Michaela
Lakova](http://www.maxdovey.com/) and [Roel Roscam
Abbing](http://www.roelroscamabbing.nl/).



![](imgs/14271496853_9e89b4eaa4_z.jpg)
Andre Castro explaining the specificities of Bibliotecha



André explained the motivation behind creating Bibliotecha as
frustration with sharing knowledge. As he explained, due to legal
regulations, lecturers at universities couldn’t upload texts online and
students wanted to be able to share study materials outside the
university regulations. Paradoxically, EPUBs are less shareable than
print books, because there are no indexed databases where one could find
extensive range of publications on particular topic (as opposed to
highly organised library collections). As a result, a Hackaton dedicated to finding solution
for sharing ePubs resulted in the prototype of Bibliotehca. The idea was
initiated by Marcel Mars and Femke Snelting at Impact Festival Utrecht.




![](imgs/14064712490_7aa1de1798_z.jpg)
Andre Castro and Florian Cramer



In technical terms, Bibliotecha is a framework to facilitate the local
distribution of digital publications within a small community. It relies
on a microcomputer running open-source software to serve books over a
local wifi hotspot. Using the browser to connect to the library one can
retrieve or donate texts. Bibliotecha proposes an alternative model of
distribution of digital texts that allows specific communities to form
and share their own collections.The Bibliotecha grows organically with
each member adds EPubs and thus the community grows. They work with
Raspberry Pie software and Calibre.

Find out more at : [www.bibliotecha.info](http://www.bibliotecha.info)

Contact André : andre[AT]andrecastro.info

![Video: http://vimeo.com/97508728](imgs/477911829_640.jpg)



# Adam Hyde: Books Are Evil, or: Towards a collaborative production model of books using free software {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [patricia](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/murtaugh/ "Posts by patricia"),
May 27, 2014 at 1:29 pm.

![](imgs/adam.jpg)

“Books are Evil” is the provocative title of Adam Hyde’s talk in the
session on Workflows, Tools and Platforms. For many years Hyde worked as
a digital media artist, however, after coming back from an art residency
in Antarctica he decided to quit the art world and focus his career on
the design and development of online knowledge production platforms. He
has done so diligently; Hyde has become a well-known figure in the E-pub
field as the founder and director of Book Sprints, and previously as the
designer of various platforms such as Booki, BookJS, Booktype, Objavi,
Lexicon and the more recent PubSweet.

Hyde outspokenly refuses to use propriety tools and has developed a range of free manuals about open
source software tools and methodologies for the collaborative
production of books. He strongly advocates using only free software, not
only because it is free but also because open source tools enable you to
constantly innovate and ameliorate the system.

Working and designing collaborative book production models using free
software, Hyde has a few lessons to share with the audience. First of
all he highly recommends HTML, unlike Regex or Farsi, it is very
efficient, he claims. “It is the Royal King, the best thing out there.”
That people try to get out of this system seems “crazy” to him.
Secondly, “always choose the simplest route to getting to the end result
you want.”



Provokingly addressing the title of his talk, Hyde exclaims that books
are evil because they gave birth to

-   copyright,
-   industrialized culture,
-   and to the construct of the solitary genius-author.

The current book market conditions for books, Hyde argues, is interwoven
with the above and could not exists without each of the above.

According to Hyde, “we need to move away from books towards a
collaborative production model of books using free software”. What’s
important for Hyde is to show that the notion of the genius, single
author of a book and the supposedly linear and solitary process of book
production is “absurd and ahistorical as it obscures not only all the
people that are working on a book, it also obscures a long history of
collaborative book production.” With his provocative stance  – books are
evil – Hyde wants to point attention to the many problems of traditional
book production that are not talked or even thought about. One of these
problems is the idea of the single author, which is not only
interrelated with rules and regulations around licensing and book
business models, but also heavily touches on cultural traditions and
emotional attachments.

Hyde predicts, “issues of voice, of knowledge production, of collective
ownership and participatory workflows and concepts will come up in
future discussions.”

“A book”, lest we forget “is a proprietary depository.” What’s the point
of E-publishing? – Hyde asks the audience rhetorically. E-pubs are a
distribution tool; the purpose is distributing – that comes with selling
– books, Hyde contends. Moreover, for Hyde it is also a mechanism that
helps us to rethink, rework and imagine “new and truly collaborative
ways of writing and knowledge production.”

![Video: http://vimeo.com/96562328](imgs/477910146_640.jpg)



# Thomas van Aalten: ‘Het evangelie van de nulletjes en eentjes is niet zaligmakend’ {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [haroldkonickx](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/haroldkonickx/ "Posts by haroldkonickx"),
May 21, 2014 at 12:45 pm.

Thomas van Aalten is a critically acclaimed Dutch writer and teacher at
the Hogeschool van Amsterdam. In this interview he answers questions on
digitalization. He thoughtfully formulates his views on topics like
reading culture, sales of e-books and a so called ‘Spotify for books’.
Van Aalten believes that literature and the printed book are not *by
definition* the same thing and he certainly sees a future for e-books or
new ways of storytelling. At the same he proves to be a critic of flashy
revenue models. The interview is in dutch.

![Video: http://vimeo.com/95953457](imgs/476002196_640.jpg)

[Thomas van Aalten: ‘Het evangelie van de nulletjes en eentjes is niet
zaligmakend’](http://vimeo.com/95953457) from [network
cultures](http://vimeo.com/networkcultures) on
[Vimeo](https://vimeo.com).



# Importing HTML into InDesign (via XML) {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
May 15, 2014 at 3:35 pm.

![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2014-05-15-at-15.54.29.png)

![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2014-05-15-at-15.51.56.png)

![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2014-05-15-at-15.46.26.png)

![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2014-05-15-at-15.43.21.png)

![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2014-05-15-at-15.41.37.png)

![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2014-05-15-at-15.30.22.png)

As part of the INC subgroup research, we are looking into hybrid
workflows that employ Markdown/HTML. While Markdown remains the source,
it is also used to generate HTML files that form the EPUB files.

Generally, the source files for InDesign are Word files. In the new
workflow Word files are not central anymore, instead they are only used
at the beginning of the process out of necessity.

In order to allow the designer to use InDesign, it is necessary to find
a way to import the HTML files into the project. This can be achieved by
using the **Import XML** function.

In this post I’ll go through the procedure employed to import HTML into
InDesign.

### 1. Change the Extension of Your HTML file to .xml

### 2. Keep Only the Body

In order to be able to import the file into InDesign, it is necessary to
delete the headers (eg. *\<!DOCTYPE html\>*) and the head tag. Also the
upper html tag should be deleted. Finally you will have only body of
your document, like in the following image.

### 3. Remove Redundant Line Breaks

Unlike the way browsers render HTML, InDesign will preserve every line
break that is in the document. Only the ones after headers or paragraphs
are needed, so the other ones need to be substituted with a space.

With python it is possible to do as follows:

    #!/usr/bin/env python
    # usage: clean.py myfile.xml 

    import re, sys

    source = str(sys.argv[1])

    f = open(source, 'r+')
    doc = f.read()

    cleandoc = re.sub('(?<!>)n',' ', doc)
    print(cleandoc)

The script will look for line breaks that are not preceded by a *\>*,
and will substitute them with a white space.

### 4. Import XML into InDesign

You can now import the clean file into InDesign from *File \> Import
XML*.

By checking the *Create Link* box you will be able to modify the content
of the xml file and it will be automatically updated into InDesign.

A window with the structure of your document will appear on the left. By
drag-and-dropping the body tag into the pages, the content will appear.

### 5. Create Paragraph and Character Styles

It make sense to keep the name of the style consistent with the relative
HTML tag (eg. *p* to be used with *\* tag).

### 6. Map Tags to Styles

The final step is to connect the HTML tags to the relative paragraph and
character styles. To do so click on *Map Tags to Styles*.

By clicking on *Map by Name* tags and styles will be automatically
associated.

### Notes

This procedure lacks support for images and footnotes.

(thanks to [Roberto Arista](http://projects.robertoarista.it/) for the
hints.)



# Miriam Rasch: ‘E-books kunnen de leeservaring naar een ander niveau tillen’ {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [haroldkonickx](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/haroldkonickx/ "Posts by haroldkonickx"),
May 14, 2014 at 1:28 pm.

Miriam Rasch is one of the speakers at the [Off the
Press](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/22-23-may-2014/) conference.
She works at the Institute of Networkcultures and teaches at the school
for media and communation (MIC) of the Hogeschool van Amsterdam.
Furthermore she is a passionate reader and literary critic. Starting off
with [Barbara Hui’s](http://barbarahui.net/litmap/) online mapping of
[W.G.
Sebald’s](http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2011/12/why-you-should-read-w-g-sebald.html)
*The Rings of Saturn* she gives us her ideas on the future of digital
publishing. The interview is in Dutch.

![Video: http://vimeo.com/95271818](imgs/475137393_640.jpg)

[Miriam Rasch: ‘E-books kunnen de leeservaring naar een ander niveau
tillen’](http://vimeo.com/95271818) from [network
cultures](http://vimeo.com/networkcultures) on
[Vimeo](https://vimeo.com).



# Vasilis van Gemert: ‘Over 100 jaar kunnen we nog HTML lezen’ {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [haroldkonickx](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/haroldkonickx/ "Posts by haroldkonickx"),
May 7, 2014 at 10:42 am.

Developer and Designer of the Amsterdam Design School for Multimedia
(CMD) makes a passionate plea for publishing on the web (in Dutch).

![Video: http://vimeo.com/94333279](imgs/474236672_640.jpg)

[‘Over honderd jaar kunnen we nog HTML lezen'; Vasilis van Gemert over
digitaal publiceren](http://vimeo.com/94333279) from [network
cultures](http://vimeo.com/networkcultures) on
[Vimeo](https://vimeo.com).



# Mark me up, Mark me down! {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Michael
Murtaugh](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michaelmurtaugh/ "Posts by Michael Murtaugh"),
April 30, 2014 at 12:50 am.

During the recent [Digitial Publishing Toolkit
hackathon](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/04/dpt-hackathon-results/),
the proposal, made in the context of the INC project, for a using a
browser-based editing workflow centered on HTML as the core “document”
format was challenged in a discussion initiated by Florian Cramer who
proposed focusing instead on the Markdown format. The resulting spirited
discussion began focussed on questions of ease of use and features of
the respective approaches and ended up touching on fundamental
principles of document markup in relation to (digital) publishing.



Can editing HTML ever be something possible for “non-experts”? Or,
better said, for those whose skills do not include some working
knowledge of HTML. While web programmers, technical editors, and
designers often come to understand HTML’s particularities through their
work, publishers and copy editors tend not to. Florian argued for the
clarity of Markdown’s cleaner “structured text” format over the
idiosyncrasies of HTML. The particular needs of the INC, whose reader
publications are primarily collections of academic essays with elements
such as footnotes and references, figures and captions, was a key issue.
HTML (in its latest incarnation HTML5) lacks a firm standard for marking
up footnotes (though current standards documents do [suggest some best
practices using HTML’s existing “link” or anchor
element](http://www.w3.org/TR/html5/common-idioms.html#footnotes)). In
contrast, markdown offers an explicit and convenient syntax for
specifying footnotes (also through a kind of “best practices” extension
to the original syntax by the “multimarkdown” project which has now been
widely [embraced by many other markdown tools such as
pandoc](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/demo/example9/pandocs-markdown.html)).
Beyond just the important details related to footnotes, the ongoing
discussion revealed a number of more fundamental questions and
principles related to markup languages.

### Markup

The concept of markup exists for decades now, coming primarily from the
intersection of engineering and publishing interests to make generalized
methods for indicating structure and editorial intentions (through
“tags”) in text documents for the purposes of producing technical
documentation in a “multi-path” way. In other words, a flexible system
where the same input text files can be used to produce documentation in
a variety of languages and/or for a variety of output forms and methods
of printing. The [SGML](http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/SGML/) standard
(Standard Generalized Markup Language, 1986) formed the basis on which
Tim Berners-Lee’s [HTML](http://www.w3.org/html/) (Hypertext Markup
Language, 1989), design would form, and led to the parallel development
of [XML](http://www.w3.org/XML/) (Extensible Markup Language, 1996) to
include applications beyond web publishing.

### Markdown

> A Markdown-formatted document should be publishable as-is, as plain
> text, without looking like it’s been marked up with tags or formatting
> instructions. While Markdown’s syntax has been influenced by several
> existing text-to-HTML filters — including Setext, atx, Textile,
> reStructuredText, Grutatext, and EtText — the single biggest source of
> inspiration for Markdown’s syntax is the format of plain text email.
> [from the Markdown
> “Philosophy”](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax#philosophy)

Markdown was born from the online writing practices around blogger John
Gruber (2004). In its very naming, Markdown thumbs it’s nose at the
generality and extensibility promised by HTML’s markup preferring
instead to focus on human read- and write-ability. With Markdown,
writers use indentation, blank lines, and bracket text with typewriter
symbols like asterisks, brackets and parentheses according to a set of
predefined rules to indicate structural elements in a text: paragraphs,
headers, and block quotations, as well to give emphasis to text, make
links, and place images. Where Markdown lacks a feature, either custom
extensions are added (such as the notation for a footnote) or else HTML
markup can be included and which then simply “passes through” the
Markdown conversion. The Markdown system is published under a [free
software](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/license) license
so others are free to contribute and re-implement it’s functionality in
their own software, which has led to the format being included in a
large number of tools and platforms.

Markdown’s less-is-more approach privileges readability over the
extensible functionality of markup, and as a result favors writing in a
“clean” and inherently “rawer” stage of development. Ideally this allows
text writing to be focussed and maximally editable while leaving open a
range of possible options in terms of how the text can then be further
manipulated (laid out, combined, reformatted) or used by other people
with other tools. Despite its initial design for publishing HTML, it’s
minimalist approach produces text sources that are inherently “open to
interpretation” and thus suitable to a variety of uses. In a sense,
where markup provides its flexibility through an explicit layering of
tags, markdown “leaves space” for other uses by omission.

### Performing the text

During the discussion, we arrived at the useful metaphor of comparing
sheet music to a recording of its musical performance. While technically
possible to use audio analysis to convert an audio recording into sheet
music, the process is inherently prone to error. Any musical performance
in fact includes many more nuances (slight rhythmic variations,
differences of interpretation, the expressiveness of each performer not
to mention the details of the audio registration itself).

In this metaphor, the audio recording is like an HTML document, and
could equally be the WYSIWYG output of a word processor like Word, or a
PDF document. While technically possible to convert any of these formats
into markdown, the process is inherently likely to produce errors. Like
the recorded performance, a published representation is rich, loaded
with extra information particular to its context (page layout,
interactivity, the subtleties of typography and spacing). These
documents lack the simpler structure of a markdown source of the same
text (where such subtleties simply cannot be expressed). Like the sheet
music, the markdown requires the additional skills of the performer to
“bring it to life” in an actual performance. The skills of the designer
or web programmer are thus engaged to make form-specific adaptations or
interpretations of the “source” text to make a particular rendering.

### The limits of markdown & the needs for flexible notation

For all the benefits of markdown, there are some important factors to
consider as limitations. By enforcing a kind of “content vs
presentation” separation Markdown privileges traditional/academic
textual writing where the assumption is that visual presentation flows
unproblematically and deterministically from the text. Following the
metaphor of musical notation, many kinds of music, from improvisational
to serial music, would be ill-served when primarily written and
expressed in traditional musical staff notation. Particular modes of
expression demand particular forms of notation. One can imagine a
multitude of “domain specific” structured text or other forms of writing
to complement markdown in a publishing workflow.

The use of Markdown can also reinforce traditional professional
separations and hierarchies where writers write, then hand off to a
designer who “designs” the eventual presentation. The workflow is
unidirectional and sequential as editorial & design work can’t be done
in parallel or give feedback to the initiating writing process. It
remains an urgent and exciting area of work to consider workflows and
tools that allow for parallel and cyclic workflows where the textual and
the visual can fully interoperate without a return to the problematics
of “WYSIWYG”. A strict separation, while beneficial in other ways, also
potentially ignores emerging online practices of writing where the loop
of writing, designing, and publishing drives new forms of writing,
design, and publication.

### The importance of standards

Finally, it remains urgent to enforce/encourage the translation of best
practices into open standards through engagement with standards bodies
like the W3C. The addition, for example, of the audio and video tags to
HTML5 has helped stimulate an explosion of tools and applications for
publishing audio and video online. The addition of firmer standards for
marking up academic references & footnotes would provide a target for
which various structured text and other formatting tools could then aim
and facilitate the kinds of interoperability of tools that markup
standards have long promised.



# DPT Hackathon Results {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Michael
Murtaugh](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michaelmurtaugh/ "Posts by Michael Murtaugh"),
April 30, 2014 at 12:49 am.

![](imgs/IMAG0554.jpg)

Thursday and Friday April 24 & 25 a hackathon took place at the Piet
Zwart Institute in Rotterdam. Over the course of 2 days, some of the
developers of the Digital Publishing Toolkit initiative gathered to work
on their projects and to share experiences, code and tools and discuss
the (devil-is-in-the) details of developing for digital publications.

present (left to right in photo): Michael Murtaugh, Marc de Bruijn,
Sauli Warmenhoven, Florian Cramer, Andre Castro, Kimmy Spreeuwenberg
(facilitating and taking the photo ;), , and Miriam Rasch dropped by for
a bit.



## An overview of the projects

### Marc de Bruijn / Valiz {#marc-de-bruijn---valiz}

Marc is working on an ePub generator for the Valiz publication ”Context
without Walls”. This web-based generator allows the publisher to
generate (and edit) epubs based on text structured with Markdown. The
EPUBs may be styled by selecting from a list of available styles
packages. These style packages are basically a zipped collection of CSS
and other resources like font files. Over the last couple of weeks they
have been adding functions, and a more user friendly interface. The
project can be found on the [DPT github
page](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/epubster).

Another (future) part of the generator will be the possiblity to
generate a cover based on the CSS of the ePub.

#### The current worflow of the generator is as follows:

-   Create a new edition by filling in the mandatory form field;
-   Add the necessary sections which will form the structure of the
    edition. Sections have a title and a body of text structured with
    Markdown. The order of the sections can be changed after creating
    them;
-   A cover can be added and a style package may be chosen;
-   After all these steps have been completed an EPUB can be generated
    or previewed within the application

#### The generator already includes:

-   The possibility to use custom fonts
-   It makes sure the epub includes all the necessary metadata
-   Chapters can be ordered, each chapter is a separate HTML file
-   It is possible to view the epub in the application itself
-   They’ve added an interface to add covers to the publication
-   Possibility to choose between different CSS via an upload function
    to add custom styles is planned

#### Software used:

-   CakePHP – <http://cakephp.org/>
-   epub.js – <http://fchasen.github.io/epub.js/> epub reader in browser
    for preview functionality
-   PHPePub <https://github.com/Grandt/PHPePub>
-   <http://validator.idpf.org> Validator/ & EPUB-Checker (standalone of
    the website)

#### Problems/Issues to look into

-   At the moment the main problem is that the generator doesn’t produce
    valid EPUBs. The files can be viewed in an EPUB reader, but do not
    validate against the EPUB 3 standard
-   The usage of endnotes causes validation problems, a fix is
    forthcoming
-   The EPUBs should play nicel with major epub readers, as of yet the
    generated EPUBs do not display their cover in Apple’s iBooks, for
    example.
-   The generator might include functions to generate a cover based on
    the chosen style package, this ties into the requirements for the
    Stedelijk Museum project, where the resulting EPUB should have a
    composited cover containing artworks chosen by the user.

#### Results/Conclusions

Some progress made resolving the many validation errors, most of them
stemming from duplicate footnote IDs. The code responsible for parsing
the footnotes should be changed, this will eliminate most, if not all,
validation errors.

A first attempt at a generated EPUB cover has been made, but the
difficulties of automatically generating any sort of simple design
involving text were encountered. Text positioning and wrapping is hard,
especially in a barebones library like GD2 (ImageMagick supposedly
offers more advanced functions in this regard). Sauli proposed a
different approach using an image export of the HTML5 canvas element,
which is worth looking into as well (as javascript libraries like
paper.js or processing.js could be employed).

### Michael Murtaugh / Institute of Network Cultures (INC)

Michael as been researching the different tools/platforms that can play
a role in the Institute of Network Cultures projects workflow for hybrid
publishing, which at the same time allows to create personalized epubs.
It tries to find a balance between complex HTML based editors, and the
actual knowledge/skills publishers have to work with these tools. The
focus is on a modular approach in which different choices for tools or
programs can be made. Working the classic way from Word, and converting
this to HTML with *pandoc*, or starting from a (multi)markdown
structured document. Rather than aiming for creating (yet another) ideal
platforms, the intent is to develop flexible workflows that allow
mixed-toolsets: editors, version control and repositories, (commandline)
document converters, epub reader software. The Society of the Query
Reader, just released in print form by the INC, is being used as in
an-process test case.

Michael showed a working sketch interface for a **personalized epub
generator** for the Society of the Query online reader. The idea is that
the results from a search engine query can be compiled and downloaded to
custom epub. The essays of the reader are indexed, using the Python
search engine [Whoosh](https://bitbucket.org/mchaput/whoosh/wiki/Home).
In addition, a separate scraper script (taken from the earlier Hackathon
in Utrecht) downloads images from the SotQ2 event Flickr stream along
with their captions and adds these to the search index. The plan is to
use Calibre’s ebook-converter then to convert the search results and
linked content into a downloadable epub.

#### Current Workflow

The documents of this publication have been developed in a classic
workflow – starting from Word files collected from authors. The
following steps have already been taking to get from this stage to the
eventual digital publication: \* Conversion doc to docx by LibreOffice
(manually done) \* docx converted to HTML by Calibre’s ebook-convert
script (batch) \* Python scripts to clean up (strip "invisible" markup
like non-breaking spaces), validating and sensibly indenting the
resulting XHTML (using html5lib & ElementTree). These [scripts can be
found in the SotQ2
repo](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/SotQ2/tree/master/scripts).

#### HTML editor?

We began with a hypothetical workflow for editing the HTML directly in
the browser using the browser’s own integrated inspection tools
(Firefox’s DOM inspector and style editor) & HTML5’s contenteditable
attribute and javascript in combination with a simple local python
webserver to save the live documents content back to the local
filesystem as an HTML file. Marc suggested we also look into using
javascript extensions such as the [medium
editor](http://daviferreira.github.io/medium-editor/) (free software
recode of the popular proprietary platform’s interface) as an example of
the "state of the art" of non-intrusive in-browser editing widgets.

In general, "live" editing of the HTML in the browser offers the
directness of "WYSIWYG" and taps into the many free software efforts to
make editing in the browser better. We discussed other possibilities
like integration with git, and some kind of simple means of applying the
various cleanup scripts (typically performed on the commandline) via
buttons in the browser interface.

This approach turned out to be contentious (Will publishers actually
work with this? It is easier to do corrections, but the structure in
html can be overwhelming. With this model you still need specialist to
help with certain problems. ) and led to a [fruitful discussion with
Florian Cramer for why a Markdown approach might be better
suited](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/04/mark-me-up-mark-me-down/).

##### Problems/Issues to look into

For the SotQ front end interface, one issue is how to adjust the search
result algorithm to include images related to articles that match the
search (but are possibly not directly linked). In other words, when
searching for the term "keyword", the search results include the article
Is Small Really Beautiful? Big Search and Its Alternatives by Astrid
Mager, and then the results include images with Astrid Mager included in
their caption. The code for the proof of concept is included in the
SotQ2 repository (though not yet in a form viewable online).

### Andre Castro / INC Notebooks {#andre-castro---inc-notebooks}

Many of the INC project issues and questions overlap with Andre Castro’s
work developing epubs for the INC netbooks series from word documents.

**Problems/Questions he came accross so far:** \* Calibre converter: how
to make clear and structured conversions from docx to html? Calibre
creates a series of artifacts in the conversion process: *\* empty tags
(again)* \* Losing table of contents hierarchy

In this workflow that starts with docx there is the necessity to enforce
a style guide / protocol for the docx e.g.: Asign a style (like h6) to
blockquotes, sections tiltes as heading, so these can be seamingless
converted. And if they are not well converted one can go back to .docx
document and search for the particular style, quickly finding the
content contained under that style. Yet, this remains difficult.

-   (Libre) Open Office \>\>\> why is the html export so bad?

#### Results/Conclusions

My initial idea was to work on the preparation of the master HTML file
that will give birth to the epub.

I aimed to developed scripts to : \* clean html artifacts from calibre
conversion \* create an indented strucutred TOC – based on the document
headings the work-flow what was I aiming for:

docx –(calibre)–\> epub(html) –(clean scripts)–\> clean html

From the discussion with Florian it was clear that there was a necessity
to have as the master/source file of the book, very lean and robust,
with only the essential structure and clear to read. Markdown was an
answer, since it has a very strict syntax, readable, and when converting
a messy html into markdown it cleans it out of the calibre artifacts.

The ”’drawback”’ is that footnotes are going to be broken. They have to
be ”prepared” before hand (using a script).

To create a structured TOC I used: using calibre conversion tool:

ebook-convert IN\_FILE.docx OUT\_FILE.epub –dont-split-on-page-breaks
–pretty-print –toc-title "Table of Contents"
–level1-toc="//*[name()=’h1′]" –level2-toc="//*[name()=’h2′]"
–level3-toc="//\*[name()=’h3′]" –epub-inline-toc

The important bit is: –level1-toc="//*[name()=’h1′]"
–level2-toc="//*[name()=’h2′]" –level3-toc="//\*[name()=’h3′]" which
translates to: all the level 1 of toc = to the name of the all the
headings 1, and so forth for the other levels.

### Sauli Warmenhoven / BIS publishers

Sauli is working on a digital version of Sketching, a tutorial
publication for designers in which they learn to draw design objects. It
is divided between different exercises that refer to different skills.
Starting point of the project was to explore the possibilities of
designing a highly interactive publication using open standards like
HTML5 rather than rely on the proprietary nature of the iBooks format.
As such they decided to develop a standalone web application, and
developed, in a sense their own custom reader experience using html5 and
javascript. The exercises and skills are two separate tracks of
chapters, that are interlinked. Building their own reading application
allows us to create a custom built reader for this specific publication.

#### Tools used

*jQuery* for javascript development, with the touch events from *jQuery
Mobile* which normalizes browser implementations of javascript and touch
events and provides a consistent way of writing code. Once everything is
working, we will then package the webapplication in a platform-specific
shell using *phonegap* a mobile development framework. Phonegap allows
us to tap into device specific features, such as locking the screen
orientation.

#### Problem/Question to look into

-   HTML5 gives new possibilities for digital publishing, also compared
    to iBook/epub, but there isn’t really a clear overview of these
    possiblities and issues. A blogpost what they. html5 vs API compare
    what the possibilities or problems are? for instance Orientation:
    Javascript/CSS knows about it (but not consistent), but need API to
    lock it
-   Could we make a table of functionalities that are HTML5 vs API only
    to illustrate how this project is really pushing the boundaries of
    HTML5 + Javascript to build highly customized apps

### Florian Cramer

-   Footnote renumbering tool (linebased, doesn’t renumber it if they
    are on the same line) : this has been solved by using pandoc to
    convert from and to markdown;
-   Markdown pretty printer / tidy markdown see above; pandoc can also
    be used for this purpose

The three Toolkit sections introducing Markdown and explaining its
relative advantages and disadvantages (relative to XML, for visual and
interactive publishing, for multi-channel publishing, extensibility vs.
human readability and ease-of-use), have been written and submitted to
the GitHub repository: docs/markdown-advantages.md docs/markdown-tips.md
docs/markdown-vs-xml.md

**Results/Conclusions** \* footnote fixer also works as a numbered list
fixer. \* Markdown introductions for Toolkit reflect our discussion on
Markdown this morning \* will still write a tool to track orphaned
footnotes

See also the [Markup vs. Markdown
Discussion](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/04/mark-me-up-mark-me-down/).



# Program booklet {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [vince](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/vince/ "Posts by vince"),
April 14, 2014 at 11:30 am.

**You can find the program booklet below. Check out the conference
program, sessions descriptions and workshops. Then, be sure to [book
your ticket for the conference
here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/22-23-may-2014/tickets-location/).** 



## Conference Content

Thursday 22 May @Museum Boijmans van Beuningen

Thursday 22 May @WORM

Friday 23 May @WORM

## Bibliotecha @ Off the Press

An instance of Bibliotecha will be present at each venue from Off the
Press. The initial titles present at Bibliotecha@Off the Press result
from a contribution of digital publications relevant to the event,
donated by its organization and participants. The Bibliotecha librarians
encourage anyone in the vicinity to contribute or gain from the present
collection, by logging into the Bibliotecha wifi network and donate or
lend e-books.

This project is initiated by: Lasse van den Bosch Christensen (DK),
Michaela Lakova (BG) http://mlakova.org, Max Dovey (GB)
www.maxdovey.com, Roelof Roscam Abbing (NL) www.roelroscamabbing.nl,
Yoana Buzova (BG) http://oyoana.com/, and André Castro (PT)
www.andrecastro.info

## Thursday 22 May @Museum Boijmans van Beuningen

### 09:30 – 10:00  doors open, coffee and tea

### 10:00 – 11.00  session 1: Today’s Book Publishing

In this opening session of the event we focus on the role of images and
artistic inventions in the publishing domain. Publishing in the arts is
not just about catalogues or art history monographs. How do artists
respond to the growing diversity in platforms and to cross-overs between
paper and digital? What is the status of the image in an increasingly
multimedia world? What artistic strategies can be identified in today’s
networked age, when image and text are starting to have a new
relationship to each other?

Moderator: Geert Lovink

Speakers

### Joost Kircz (NL)

#### The Fashionable Fever of Going Electronic

Art and design books are joining the fashionable fever of ‘going
electronic’. Here, in contrast to novels, images are more important than
text. In the arts the text explicates the image, whilst in many other
genres the image illustrates the text. This fundamental difference makes
an electronic arts book a much more demanding, challenging and
problematic project. Firstly, we encounter the same issues as with
purely textual works; secondly, we have also to address the issues of
image quality, colour control, the spatial relationship between text and
image – and even more than with text – the relationship between ‘items’
(parts of text, images of cutouts) and large repositories, such as those
of museums. Lastly, art printing can choose between many different
qualities and types of paper to print on, but the screen is a glowing,
often flickering substrate; so it must also be decided which substrate
works best for which reader or consumer.

### Alessandro Ludovico (IT)

#### Networks as agents in the clash between personal and industrial
post-digital print

The post-digital print era has definitely begun. On one hand, the boom
in net content or IT process-based artists’ books (with a whole taxonomy
of techniques and approaches), and the collective effort to scan
underground print culture and share it in digital repositories, is
revamping the production and rediscovery of critical content in a
classic form. On the other hand, the unveiling of Google’s huge
industrial scanning plans, the growing unsustainability of newspapers’
business models, the growing role of software in literary and
journalistic production, and the constant fine-tuning of commercial
e-publications’ rules are slowly changing the industrial printed
mediascape. The resulting scenario helps to shed new light onto the role
of networks in these processes, and the possibility of considering them
as agents rather than as media *per se*.

 

## 11:00 – 13.00  Session 2: One Thousand and One Publishing
Workflows, Tools, and Platforms

##   … Shahrazad awoke and signalled to her sister Dunyazad who sat up
and said, “Allah upon thee, O my sister, recite to us some new story,
delightsome and delectable, wherewith to while away the waking hours of
our latter night.” … and thus, on the first night of the Thousand Nights
and a Night, she began…

This panel explores the diversity of tools and processes for publishing
online from highly designed and specialised platforms and content
management systems to more DIY heterogeneous and dynamic toolchains.
What are the advantages and disadvantages of the different approaches. A
group of practitioners representing a range of disciplines and
approaches share their experiences.

Moderator: Michael Murtaugh (USA)

Speakers

### Elizabeth Castro (USA)

### Adam Hyde (NZ)

Adam will talk about his experiences over the last eight years with
different free software tools and methodologies for creating digital
books. Tools include *Booktype*, *Lexicon*, *PubSweet*, *Objavi*,
*BookJS*, *Booki* and others. Methodologies include Book Sprints,
Collaborative Knowledge Production, and others.

### John Haltiwanger (USA/NL)

#### Title: Free Your Objects (And Let the Subject Follow)

Subtitle: Textuality and Reciprocity in the Metastability

Tools evolve reciprocally with their use, as do the users of those
tools. What we can do and what we wish we could do are enabled and
limited not only by the tools we have access to but also by the larger
socio-economic conditions that determine these tools and their modes of
production and operation. Tools actively participate in shaping our
identity as producers, makers, and appreciators. Through the the case
study of a multi-output typesetting workflow that uses only libre
software, the talk will explore  a vocabulary to think differently about
how we work with text today, one that focuses on qualities of
re-composition and the dynamics of a different type of ownership.

### Oliver Wise – The People’s E-Book (USA)

#### Making .epubs easy with The People’s E-book

Oliver Wise from The People’s E-book will walk the audience step by step
through the creation of an .epub using The People’s E-book. He will
explain the advantages of creating something that limits your options
and explain the founding principle of keeping things as simple as
possible. He will also showcase the open source nodejs module ‘pe-epub’
that was developed for The People’s E-book, and expand on the
possibilities for its use in a wide variety of settings.

## 13:00 – 14:00  lunch break

## 14:00 – 15:00  Session 3: Introducing the Digital Publishing
Toolkit

The Digital Publishing Toolkit initiative, a network of two applied
universities and art school research departments, four Dutch art and
design publishers and several graphic and media design bureaus, is
working on an accessible  “how-to” guide for electronic publishing in
the arts along with a collection of open source software tools for
editing and designing electronic books. This session will give an
overview of the Digital Publishing Toolkit initiative research results
and their most interesting findings in the field of electronic
publishing.

Moderator: Margreet Riphagen

Speakers

### Florian Cramer (DE/NL)

#### Electronic publishing in the arts – what does work and what
doesn’t

The computer industry promises for electronic publishing – better
audiovisuality, more interactivity, easier distribution, lower costs,
easier do-it-yourself publishing – often don’t quite match the reality
of what is possible with electronic books and magazines, especially for
small and low budget publishers. On the other hand, there new yet
not-so-obvious opportunities and possibilities for publishers that go
digital. This presentation will summarize some of the general experience
designers and publishers gathered in one year of conducting the Digital
Publishing Toolkit project.

### Miriam Rasch (NL)

#### Hybrid Workflows for Hybrid Publishing

Any publishing workflow that takes into account not only print but also
digital publications – be it a website, an online PDF, ePub or other
form – has to be flexible. In order to be open to different outputs, the
workflow should comprise different strategies and tools – while at the
same time being clear and transferable between authors, editors, and
designers, just as the content is clear and transferable between output
formats and platforms. The INC subgroup tries to establish precisely
that, balancing between technological constraints and possibilities,
between high qualitative standards and a flexible and creative handling
of materials. We hope to present an outcome that illustrates precisely
this: your own personal ePub, collected for you on your own terms from a
range of articles, blogs, photos, or videos. Want to know about social
media without mentioning Facebook? Curious to see a collection of videos
and essays on web search, with a focus on algorithms? What new forms of
personalized publication become possible when editing, compilation, and
design processes themselves become partially algorithmic?

### Pia Pol (NL)

####*Context Without Walls*, Creating ePub3s through the Epubster
Generator

Valiz and the art publicist Daphne Pappers are currently developing a
new series of publications named *Context Without Walls*. The
publications in this series are focused on artists from all over the
world. The books are multilingual and contain essays as well as images.
The paper versions of *Context Without Walls* are being designed by
Meeus Ontwerpt. Valiz, the designers of Meeus Ontwerpt and the
developers of PUNTPIXEL have together attempted to create a digital
version of *Common Skin*, the first publication in the *Context Without
Walls* series. Taking into account the technical possibilities and
questions of design, they have sought a solution for the issues that
arise when turning a paper book into an e-book: the *Epubster*. The
*Epubster* is generator which enables a publisher to create ePub3s with
extensive designs as well as images in the format of a series.

### Loes Sikkes (NL)

#### Highlights – ePub personalizer

### Arjen de Jong (NL)

#### Sketching Skills

The BIS-publisher workgroup set out to research the following issue: how
can we make highly interactive rich media publications, accessible on
multiple devices, at a reasonable cost? They show the problems and
solutions encountered in their case study Sketching Skills, an App
version of Sketching, the bestselling book that teaches sketching to
industrial designers, by Koos Eissen and Roselien Steur.

## 15:00 – 15:30  tea break

## 15:30 – 17:00  Session 4: Showcases

As the field of electronic publishing continues to expand, it is giving
rise to new possibilities in design, distribution and modes of
publishing. A wide range of designers, artists, or (designer/artists as)
publishers will elaborate on their practices, present new approaches to
book design, and give insights into how they are tackling the challenges
of electronic publishing.

Moderator: Kimmy Spreeuwenberg

Speakers

### Joaquín González – visualMANIAC (SP)

#### Setting up an art digital book store, or ‘Working out how to do
something is better than waiting for a magic formula’

visualMANIAC was born with the intention to preserve the role of the
specialist publisher and bookseller in the digital world.

### Michelle Kasprzak – \_V2 (NL/CA)

####The eBook as a Vehicle for Re-dissemination and Creation

In this talk, Michelle Kasprzak, Curator at V2\_ Institute for the
Unstable Media in Rotterdam, will discuss the creation of an eBook
series as a complement to public events at V2\_. The strategies behind
its series of Blowup Readers – including using the series as a vehicle
to mix old and new content, experiment with different forms of
collaborative writing, re-purpose archived material, disseminate
artistic research, and reach new audiences – will be analyzed and
discussed.

### Matthew So (US)

####: Badlands Unlimited: We Make Books in an Expanded Field

Badlands Unlimited publishes books on a varied range of topics that do
not cover specific genres, but which have included a .gif-filled eBook
as an art-advertising White Pages, entitled *AD BOOK*; an English
translation of three essays by Saddam Hussein on the purposes of
democracy, entitled *On Democracy*; a series of formerly unpublished
interviews of Marcel Duchamp by the *New Yorker* art critic Calvin
Tomkins, entitled *Marcel Duchamp: The Afternoon Interviews*; and most
recently, a book of drawings by the art curator and critic Hans Ulrich
Obrist, entitled *Think Like Clouds*.

Matthew So, an associate of Badlands, will speak about the more
important and recent of these titles. A few book trailers will be shown.
Matthew handles sales, distribution and inventory operations at
Badlands. Questions in relation to these functions will be answered, and
unrelated questions will make for interesting conversation.

### Angie Keefer

#### Meta The Difference Between The Two

## 20:00 – 22:00  Digital Arts & Crafts in the Field of Publishing
@Worm

“We pursued distractions and called them enhancements.” This is how
e-book designer Peter Mayers drily summarized the recent history of
experimental digital publishing in the *New York Times*.

It is time to look closely at the plethora of available functionalities
and the value they have beyond the rhetoric of innovation. If not in the
baroqueness of rich media, slick interfaces and smooth gestures, where
does the core of digital publishing lie? What happens when, instead of
asking what e-books can technically do (especially in comparison to
print), we ask how can they be produced, altered, stored and
distributed?

During the session, artists and designers will present their own
practices and approaches to digital publishing that both take advantage
of and question the current modes of content production and
dissemination. The presented cases will open the debate on possible
strategies to build sustainable, networked or hybrid publishing models.

Curator: Silvio Lorusso

Artists

### James Cuddy, Danilo Di Cuia, Roma Levin – Six:Thirty (UK)

#### Experiments in Collaborative Publishing

For the Off The Press conference, Six:Thirty explore the significance of
online networks to the role of the designer. During an experiment at the
V&A museum entitled Collate, the studio set out to co-create a
publication with visitors, using images automatically downloaded from a
creative commons resource. The installation and resulting book represent
a new collaborative approach to publishing, where designers define a
process and users determine the result.

Six:Thirty create new experiences with design and technology. As
designers and technologists they use a broad range of experience to
deliver projects for brands and cultural institutions. Six:Thirty’s work
is realised in branding, creative direction, and user experience design.

### Delphine Bedel, researcher (NL)

#### The Networked Book – Publishing as Artistic Practice

Artists’ books seem not to have yet taken the digital publication as a
means of production and creation of its own, and seem to keep ‘paper
books’ as their model. Facing the complexity of understanding the
challenges of the current revolution in publishing, Bedel’s PhD research
aims to address the transition in the publishing industry and
digitalization of content, from the perspective of the book as a
privilege medium for artists. Shifting from print to software culture,
how are we to frame and create the relevant and urgent critical tools
(theory, softwares), and challenges to be investigated by
artists/publishers? New modes of production, appropriation, distribution
and collaborative practices, as well as extended forms of ‘books’ will
be presented.

### Lukas Jost Gross – TRAUMAWIEN (AT)

#### Ghostwriters and Literary Trojan Horses

TRAUMAWIEN will present the 2012 work GHOSTWRITERS: bots that compiled
and uploaded hundreds of e-books on Amazon.com with text stolen from
YouTube video comments. And the 2013-ongoing work HIJACKED EBOOK
BESTSELLERS AS LITERARY TROJAN HORSES, which uses piracy distribution
mechanisms to massively publish altered/contaminated book contents
exploiting what will be known as ‘native advertising’ in digital
journalism and digital book publishing.

TRAUMAWIEN

TRAUMAWIEN.AT (Vienna, Austria and St. Gallen, Switzerland) published
conceptual digital literature from 2010 to 2013: these included
continuous algorithmic works as well as asynchronous ‘Artclub’ Events
merging theatre, digital literature, acid techno and art exhibitions.
Since 2014 it has focused on a definition of ‘relational publishing’ as
a practice.

### Eleanor Hanson, Oliver Wise – The People’s E-Book (USA)

#### Publishing Constitutes a Public

Oliver Wise and Eleanor Hanson Wise of The Present Group and The
People’s E-book will present an overview of their current and past
projects in order to showcase the different community-based funding
models they use to support their practice. They will present an artistic
production and publishing practice rooted in both the physical and
digital worlds, and how their experiences shaped the building of The
People’s E-book.

The People’s E-Book is a free e-book creation platform for artists,
authors, and alternative presses who want to experiment, publish new
types of books, and push into new territory. After raising almost three
times its Kickstarter goal in 2013, The People’s E-book is now in beta
and its community is outputting reflowable .ePubs for free everyday.

### Manuel Schmalstieg – Greyscale Press (CH)

#### Black holes in the Gutenberg Galaxy: Non-books, anti-books,
maybe-books, and everything in between

This talk will review the latest productions of Greyscale Press, and
expose the promiscuous workflows and methodologies it puts in place to
fit its needs, urges and dreams.

The electronic publishing disruption has induced a range of uncanny
side-effects: print-on-demand spam is lurking on library bookshelves,
publisher-entrepreneurs are buying into the infinite monkey theorem, and
a whole generation of writers is turning SEO-aware. The Gutenberg Galaxy
is full of black holes.

Embracing these phenomena, Greyscale Press deliberately runs against the
tide of analogue-to-digital conversion, turning born-digital materials
into physical forkbombs.

Greyscale Press, a post-digital publishing house, is crafting book-like
artifacts and merging the tool sets inherited from 20th-century
modernist avant-gardes, post-structuralism, the free software and
copyleft movement, and the latest strains of crypto and cypherpunk
activism. Recent publications include *L’Eve future*, a crowdsourced
collection of typographic specimens for over 200 libre and open-source
fonts; *netfahcsnegiE enhO nnaM reD*, a mirrorview edition of Robert
Musil’s *A Man Without Qualities*; and the freshly-launched
*#freespeech* collection, a series of readers on privacy and data
politics.

### Willem de Kooning Academy students (NL)

With the Digital Publishing Toolkit project and its ensuing Off The
Press conference event as a catalyst, second-year students at the
Graphic Design Department of the Willem de Kooning Academy were asked to
research the theme of digital publishing. What are its consequences, its
opportunities, its effects on reading, production, distribution, and so
on? What role can they, as the upcoming generation of graphic designers,
play in the process of ideation and design? How relevant do they feel
that it is?

The first part of the assignment consisted of extensively testing and
reviewing various tools and platforms related to the digital publishing
field. For the second part (still in progress) the students were asked
to apply their findings, not only from the testing of tools, but also
from their design research, to the transformation of a non-digital text
into a digital text. They worked with texts originating from Octavo
Publishers’ publication *Een ruimte om in te bewegen* by Serge Daney.
They translated these texts into a digital publication for computer,
tablet, e-reader or smartphone – with design approaches ranging from the
experimental, critical and provocative to the functional, practical and
all-embracing.

## Friday 23 May @ WORM

## 09:30 – 10:00  doors open, coffee and tea

## 10:00 – 14:30  Workshops

(Please note that there is a limit of 30 participants per workshop, and
it is necessary to buy a separate ticket to participate
(http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/ticket). No prior
knowledge or skills necessary. Bring your own laptop.)

### Megan Hoogenboom (NL) & Harold Konickx

#### Paper to Code: Transforming the Future of Reading

What happens when a visual poem is translated to .ePub 3? Which elements
are lost and which elements have to be added? In this workshop .ePub 3
will be explored on the basis of a transformation of a visual poem. We
will go from paper to code, from page to HTML, from analogue to digital.

Hogeschool van Amsterdam instructor Harold Konickx will select two poems
to work with. During the transformation some elements will have to be
deleted (the page, for example), while others can be added to enrich the
poem (such as hyperlinks and audio files). By working with part or all
of a visual poem the shortcomings and opportunities of the .ePub are
quickly discovered. Every person reads or interprets a poem in their own
way, which results in a different transformation. The different outcomes
also influence the way one reads the original poem. This workshop
provides a creative introduction to .ePub 3: a crash course in .ePub 3
and in making a personal translation of a poem.

### John Haltiwanger (USA/NL) & OSP

#### Electronic Publishing Workflows: (Multi)Markdown & Pandoc

Pandoc is a minimalist open source program that converts documents
between different formats – including HTML, epub, PDF. In conjunction
with Markdown, a way of marking up plain text files with easily readable
formatting signs popular for E-Mail and blogging, it can be used as a
powerful system for publishing in different document formats and media
(web, print, e-book…) from one single source document file.

This workshop will teach participants the practical use of Pandoc and
Markdown, departing from their own particular backgrounds, needs and
expectations. We will take individually selected online texts and
convert them to Markdown. From there we will craft Pandoc translation
templates for HTML/CSS and PDF (using the open source typesetting
framework Context). These templates may be context-specific (only
fitting one particular type of publication) or generic (suitable for a
broad range of publications) as we design them. But they will
nevertheless be universally applicable to any Markdown source document.
Participants will leave with a small arsenal of Open Source, cross-media
typesetting and document generation tools, and their own design
templates for these tools.

### Danja Vasiliev, Michael Zeder & Joscha Jäger

#### Superglue: Reshaping the web?

Web 2.0 promised that everyone could become a free and creative media
publisher, but had exactly the opposite result. Today, most people’s web
content is locked into the proprietary services of only a handful of
Internet social media giants. Individual freedom of expression fits
perfectly in a consumerist environment of templates and themes. Privacy
is not an issue because “we have nothing to hide”. And cloud computing
refers to everything except the clouds of CO2 that are being emitted by
data centres all over the world. Superglue is the successor to Hotglue
([http://hotglue.me](http://hotglue.me/)), a tool to intuitively create
your own website that is being used by thousands of users. Superglue not
only allows Internet users to simply and cheaply design websites, but
also run a energy saving micro-webserver and bring personal data back to
your home and thus truly own it again.

In this workshop you will join the Superglue development team for a
four-hour exploration and alpha testing. Evaluate Superglue and provide
your feedback on its design and functionality. Learn how to build
Superglue websites and find out how to get involved in the project.

Participants will receive a Superglue router and the download links to
the Superglue plugin that enables you to edit your webpage directly in
the browser, and the firmware that turns your Superglue router into a
personal web server. Superglue is ‘hosted’ by WORM
([http://worm.org](http://worm.org/)) together with the Libre Graphics
Research Unit ([http://lgru.net](http://lgru.net/)) and supported by
Stimuleringsfonds Creatieve Industrie
(<http://www.stimuleringsfonds.nl/>) and the European Union
(<http://europa.eu/>).

## 14:30 – 15:00  tea break

## 15:00 – 16:30  Session 5: Underground e-Publishing

Just like mp3 in music, electronic publishing began as a non- or even
anti-commercial subculture: with literary classics freely published by
Project Gutenberg, with underground books and pamphlets such as the
“Principia Discordia” and Abbie Hoffman’s “Steal this Book” circulating
on electronic bulletin boards, computer hackers swapping “disk mags”.
Long before the Amazon Kindle, ASCII e-books and e-zines were popular
underground media, with their own minimalist aesthetics and radical
politics. Since the 1990s, artists and media activists have entered this
field as well, building up pirate libraries with electronic versions of
classical art and critical theory books, and extending the concept of
free software and peer-to-peer file sharing to publishing. What has been
achieved in this culture, what is its status quo, and what can
mainstream publishing learn from it?

Moderator: Florian Cramer

Speakers:

### Sebastian Luetgert (DE)

#### Precarious Publishing, Autonomous Archiving, Collaborative
Collecting

As every Western visitor to South and South-East Asia has to learn, no
such thing as an ‘underground scene’ can be found there, as the required
historical and material preconditions do not exist. What exists, other
than a breathtaking abundance of unattainable material wealth, is
precarity of every hue. And it is precisely precarity, a pragmatism of
leakage and residue rather than a politics of ‘underground’, that
independent publishing initiatives in these regions usually stem from.
As we shift from sharing files to sharing libraries, from a peer-to-peer
to an archive-to-archive mindset, and from building download ratio to
building institutions, the task is to not just acknowledge, but to
actively exploit the practical contradictions faced by publishing
projects outside the Western world.

### Marcell Mars (HR)

#### Free access to resources for every member of society

Public library embodies dreams and fantasies from the past about the
future where it is possible to produce knowledge about knowledge and
where every member of society have free access to these resources. It is
not a surprise that librarians who were dreaming about these
epistemological heavens imagined the world without borders where people
live in piece and prosperity. In only 100 years after Melvil Dewey, Paul
Otlet, Henry La Fontain, Karl Wilhelm Bührer, Adolf Saagert, and many
others were establishing Repertoire Bibliographique Universel,
Mundaneum, Die Brücke – Internationales Institut zur Organisierung der
geistigen Arbeit, League of Nations, International Institute of
Intellectual Cooperation or just helping public libraries all around the
world give access to knowledge to every member of society, only 100
years after, all of these dreams will die with the last of public
library being shut down because of commercial interests of publishers
and austerity measures.

### Dusan Barok (SK)

#### Digital Imprint: the Motion of Publishing

It has become an established fact that virtually all utterances in
digital networks are being recorded. Vast archives spanning the globe –
run not just by information agencies, but by the whole industry in the
widest sense – are storing a treasure trove of mostly raw, unedited
material they do not intend to publish. Regardless of what preventive
measures are taken, the reality of their existence persistently surfaces
through ‘editorial intervention’ (typically in the form of leaks), today
a genre in its own right. Framing this phenomenon as symptomatic of the
presence of digital networks in the very fabric of cultural expression
invites us to rethink the roles we play online. As the subjects of
tracking and surveillance, we tend to view this role as one of passive
acceptance, defense, or an eventual exit. But viewed in light of these
ambiguities, what would it take to reclaim the emancipatory potential of
networking formerly articulated in the positive ‘netizen’ notion of the
*user* by reframing it to those of the *author* and *editor*?

## 16:30 – 17:30 Bazaar and Drinks @WORM

A number of artists, publishers and related practitioners of electronic
publishing will be present during this Bazaar to showcase their projects
in an informal way, looking forward to meeting visitors for
acquaintance, discussion, and exchange of ideas.

#Biographies

## Dušan Barok (SK)

Dušan Barok is an artist, writer and cultural activist involved in
critical practice in the fields of software, art, and theory. He is
founding editor of Monoskop (a wiki for art, culture and media
technology), a graduate of the Piet Zwart Institute, Rotterdam, and a
member of the collective La Société Anonyme.

## Delphine Bedel (NL)

Delphine Bedel works as a photographer, publisher and curator, based in
Amsterdam. She is a PhD researcher at Leiden University/PhDArts and a
founder of Monospace Press. Her awarded editorial work with artists and
designers includes over 60 books. She regularly contributes to books and
magazines and is a frequent speaker at international conferences. She is
also the author of *All that is Solid Melts into Air – Notes on
Tourism*.

Her current curatorial practice focuses on publishing as artistic
practice, and this is also the topic of her PhD research. Bedel has
curated over 40 exhibitions, screenings and lectures series. She has
taught at the Geneva University of Art and Design / MFA (2009-2012), the
Dutch Art Institute/ArTEZ (2009-2011), on the Studium Generale of the
Rietveld Academy, and at the Sandberg Institute, Amsterdam. Her work is
shown internationally.

## Elizabeth Castro (US)

## Florian Cramer (DE/NL)

Florian Cramer is a reader for new media in art and design at Hogeschool
Rotterdam, and director of the Creating 010 centre for practice-oriented
research in support of creative professions. He also is dean of the
Parallel University of WORM, the Rotterdam-based Institute of
Avantgardistic Recreation. Previously, he has been a university lecturer
in Comparative Literature and course director of the Media Design &
Communication Masters programme at Piet Zwart Institute, Rotterdam. Last
publication: Anti-Media, NAi Publishers, 2013; What Is Post-Digital?, A
Peer-Review Journal About, 2014**.**

## James Cuddy (UK)

James studied at Design at Goldsmiths College. Prior to co-founding
Six:Thirty, James worked with a range of design and branding agencies in
London and Barcelona including 4Creative and Base Design.

## Danilo Di Cuia (IT)

Danilo is an interactive developer with a background in graphic design
and a focus in human-computer interaction. With six years of experience
in the development field, he has worked in the US and in the UK for
clients such as ITV, BBC, BHF and many others.

## Adam Hyde (NZ)

Adam Hyde has been on the pioneering edge of publishing since he
returned from an artist’s residency in Antarctica in 2006 and gave up
art to start FLOSS Manuals. Since then Adam has founded many projects
including the first browser-based, end-to-end book production platform
(Booktype) and the Book Sprint methodology. Adam now consults on
projects ranging from the collaborative production of multilingual
lexicons to collaborative academic and scientific research production.
Twitter: @booksprint

## Eleanor Hanson (US)

Eleanor Hanson and Oliver Wise are the co-founders of The Present Group,
a creative studio working at the intersection of art and technology.
They focus on devising and building systems that support creators.
Projects of The Present Group include an art subscription service, a web
hosting service that funds an intermittent arts prize, Art Micro
Patronage (an experimental exhibition platform showcasing and funding
artwork online), The People’s E-book (a free online tool for building
e-books), and Compensation Foundation (an online database for gathering
and displaying information on how cultural producers are compensated).

## Arjen de Jong (NL)

Arjen de Jong is senior designer at Essense, an Amsterdam based service
design agency. He was a founding member of Buro Duplex, a collective of
freelance programmers and designers. He also initiated the Stereo
Publication project, a cross-media publishing project *avant la lettre*.

## Angie Keefer

## Geert Lovink (NL)

Geert Lovink is a media theorist, internet critic, and the author of
*Zero Comments* (2007) and *Networks Without a Cause* (2012). Since 2004
he has been a researcher in the School for Communication and Media
Design at the Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences (HvA) where he is
the founding director of the Institute of Network Cultures. From
2004–2013 he also taught in the New Media Master’s programme at Media
Studies, the University of Amsterdam. Since 2009 he has been a media
theory professor at the European Graduate School (Saas-Fee) and in 2011
he became an associate member of the Centre for Digital Cultures at
Leuphana University (Lueneburg/D).

## Alessandro Ludovico (IT)

Alessandro Ludovico is an artist, media critic, and has been
editor-in-chief of *Neural* magazine since 1993. He has published and
edited several books, and has lectured worldwide. He is one of the
founders of[http://mag.net](http://mag.net/) (Electronic Cultural
Publishers organization). He has also served as an advisor to the
Documenta 12’s Magazine Project. He is Adjunct Professor at OCAD
University in Toronto, and teaches at the Academy of Art in Carrara and
NABA in Milan. He is one of the authors of the Hacking Monopolism
trilogy of artworks (Google Will Eat Itself, Amazon Noir, Face to
Facebook). He is currently a PhD scholar at Anglia Ruskin University in
Cambridge (UK).[http://neural.it](http://neural.it/)

## Joaquín González (SP)

visualMANIAC is an independent book store specializing in art,
architecture, design, photography, film, fashion and visual culture. Its
aim is to offer the best selection of e-books and digital magazines and
to provide art publishers with an uncomplicated way to be present in the
digital environment. For them, editorial goods are more than bundled
paper and beautiful objects to decorate bookshelves. Publishers put a
lot of effort into producing amazing content that ultimately becomes
books and magazines, and we intend to give those products a longer,
richer life. We have managed to build a catalogue containing over 1000
digital titles published by more than 100 international publishers and
art centers. Our books and magazines can be read on computers, iPads and
Android tablets.

## Lukas Jost Gross (AT)

Studied Digital Arts with Peter Weibel, University of Applied Arts,
Vienna. Working and living in Vienna.

## John Haltiwanger (US)

Since arriving in Amsterdam to do a Master’s degree in New Media at the
University of Amsterdam in 2009, John first taught at universities
around the city while participating in the caravan of design,
philosophy, and joy that is Open Source Publishing where he and the
other members worked with artists, collectives, initiatives and public
institutions – but most of all with ideas – until eventually arriving at
a full-time position as a programmer. At night he can be found tinkering
with sounds, amongst other things.

## Eleanor Hanson (US)

Eleanor Hanson and Oliver Wise are the co-founders of The Present Group,
a creative studio working at the intersection of art and technology.
They focus on devising and building systems that support creators.
Projects of The Present Group include an art subscription service, a web
hosting service that funds an intermittent arts prize, Art Micro
Patronage (an experimental exhibition platform showcasing and funding
artwork online), The People’s E-book (a free online tool for building
e-books), and Compensation Foundation (an online database for gathering
and displaying information on how cultural producers are compensated).

## Megan Hoogenboom (NL)

Megan Hoogenboom finished her Bachelor’s degree in Graphic Design at the
Willem de Kooning Academy with two projects. The first was a fictional
new identity for Holland Festival; the second was a book on two
districts in Rotterdam. Both projects were created following a system
and design strategy of her own invention. Working with systems and a
fascination for the transformation from the analogue to the digital
world played a big role in her projects during her Master’s study at the
Piet Zwart Institute. These and other projects can be viewed on her
website[www.meganhoogenboom.nl](http://www.meganhoogenboom.nl/). Another
project is the transformation of the poem *Boem Paukeslag* by Paul van
Ostaijen to .ePub format. In this project all elements of the e-Book
reader were explored by translating the fonts and the design to .ePub
format. Megan is currently working as a independent designer with a
focus on .ePub design. Her latest .ePub can be downloaded at
http://[creating010.com/ebook](http://creating010.com/ebook).

## Joscha Jaeger (GE)

Joscha Jaeger is a freelance interface designer at filmicweb –
Hypervideo Interface Design and a research assistant at Merz Akademie
Stuttgart. His work covers web-based hypervideo technology, search
interfaces, web applications for educational settings, and collaborative
editing systems.

<http://filmicweb.org/>

## Michelle Kasprzak (CA/NL)

Michelle Kasprzak is a curator and writer based in Amsterdam. She is
currently Curator at V2\_ Institute for the Unstable Media in Rotterdam,
the Netherlands; co-curator of the Dutch Electronic Art Festival 2014;
and a member of IKT (the International Association of Curators of
Contemporary Art). Michelle has exhibited and lectured across North
America and Europe. In 2006 she was awarded a curatorial research
residency at the Nordic Institute for Contemporary Art in Helsinki,
Finland; in 2010 she attended the Summer Seminars for Art Curators in
Yerevan, Armenia; and in 2011 she was a guest of the BAM International
Visitor’s Programme in Flanders. She has written critical essays for *C
Magazine*, *Volume*, *Spacing*, *CV Photo*, *Public*, *Mute*, and
several online journals on a wide range of subjects in the realm of
contemporary culture. Her writing has appeared in anthologies and
exhibition catalogues in both Canada and Europe. In 2006 Michelle
founded a leading blog on the subject of curating contemporary art,
Curating.info. She is also an active weightlifter with current personal
records of 80kg squat, 52.5kg bench press, and 90kg deadlift.

## Joost Kircz (NL)

After science studies at the universities of Amsterdam and Utrecht,
Joost joined Elsevier as an international science publisher. Here he
started his research on electronic publishing with a first paper on
database publishing, way back in 1987. In 1998 he started KRA Publishing
Research ([www.kra.nl](http://www.kra.nl/)). In 2006 he joined the HvA
as a part-time lector on electronic publishing, and as of 2010 he has
coordinated its electronic publishing programme. He chaired two
conferences,[the Unbound
Book](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/outofink/unbound-book-2011/)
and[Boek uit de
Band](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/outofink/boek-uit-de-band-2012/).
The proceedings of the first conference were recently published by
Amsterdam University Press. All his publications are available on
the[KRA](http://www.kra.nl/) website.

## Roma Levin (RU)

Roma is a Russian born art director with a background in design and
advertising. Before co-founding Six:Thirty, Roma worked in Moscow and
London for a variety of clients ranging from Tate to Sir Bryan Ferry.

## Silvio Lorusso (IT)

Silvio Lorusso is an Italian artist and designer. His ongoing PhD
research in Design Sciences at IUAV University of Venice is focused on
the intersections between publishing and digital technology from the
perspective of art and design. He regularly collaborates with the
Institute of Network Cultures in Amsterdam. After he received his MA in
Visual and Multimedia Communications in 2011, he spent a period of study
at the Networked Media course of the Piet Zwart Institute in Rotterdam.
He took part in exhibitions, festival and events such as Transmediale
(Germany), Unlike Us (Netherlands), and Fahrenheit39 (Italy). He has
written for blogs and magazines such as *Progetto Grafico* and
*Doppiozero*. He launched the Post-Digital Publishing Archive
(p-dpa.net) in 2013.

## Sebastian Luetgert (DE)

Sebastian Lütgert, a.k.a. Robert Luxemburg, is an artist, programmer and
writer. He is a co-founder of Bootlab and Pirate Cinema Berlin, software
developer in residency at CAMP in Bombay, and the initiator of several
online media archives, most
notably[textz.com](http://textz.com/),[0xDB.org](http://0xdb.org/),[Pad.ma](http://pad.ma/)
and[Indiancine.ma](http://indiancine.ma/). His artistic work has been
exhibited internationally since the late 1990s, and his writing has been
published in *FAZ*, *Süddeutsche Zeitung*, *taz*, *Jungle World* and
*e-flux Magazine*, among others. He is currently working on a fictional
documentary film set in Dubai.

## Marcell Mars (HR)

Marcell Mars is one of the founders of Multimedia Institute â€“ mi2 and
net.culture club mama in Zagreb. He initiated Public Library, GNU GPL
publishing label EGOBOO.bits, started Skill sharing in mama + Skill
sharing’s satellites g33koskop, ‘Nothing will happen’ and ‘The Fair of
Mean Equipment’.

Marcell participated in curating/producing mi2 yearly exhibitions: I’m
still alive (2001), re:Con and Freedom to creativity! (2005., 2006.
2007.) and in conceptual exhibition System.hack() (2006).

When in Zagreb Marcell hangs out in Hacklab in mama, in Belgrade runs
Wonder of technology, Hackers lenses and Programming for non-programmers
at Faculty of Media and Communication. Through 2011-2012 did a research
Ruling Class Studies at Jan Van Eyck in Maastricht. In 2013. he was
fellow at Akademie Schloss Solitude in Stuttgart.

## Michael Murtaugh (US)

Michael Murtaugh (automatist.org) designs and researches community
databases, interactive documentaries, and tools for new forms of reading
and writing online. He teaches in the Master’s Degree programme in Media
Design and Communication at the Piet Zwart Institute in Rotterdam, and
is a member of Constant in Brussels.

## Miriam Rasch (NL)

Miriam Rasch started working as a publication manager at the Institute
of Network Cultures in June 2012. She holds Master’s degrees in Literary
Studies (2002) and Philosophy (2005). Since graduating she worked as a
(web) editor and from 2008 on as a programmer for the Studium Generale
public lectures department at Utrecht University, organizing events and
taking care of digital broadcasts and online representation. She also
worked as a lecturer for Liberal Arts and Sciences, and is teaching
philosophy and media theory in the Media, Information and Communication
department. She writes book reviews and guest posts for different
websites and magazines; her personal blog can be found on
miriamrasch.nl.

## Margreet Riphagen (NL)

Margreet Riphagen started working at the Institute of Network Cultures
(INC) in March 2008 and is involved in various research projects. She
holds a Master’s degree in Information Science (Human Centered
Multimedia), a post-Bachelor’s degree in Business Science, and a
Bachelor’s degree in Communication Management. Besides working at the
INC at the Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences’ Knowledge Centre,
CREATE-IT, Margreet also works for the MediaLAB Amsterdam, part of the
knowledge centre. Before this Margreet worked at Waag Society and Media
Guild for over five years.

## Pia Pol (NL)

Pia Pol (Amsterdam, 1985) is Deputy Publisher at Valiz book and cultural
projects in Amsterdam with whom she has worked since 2008. She received
a BA in English Language & Culture and and an MA in American Studies
from the University of Amsterdam. She has been working in the (art) book
trade for over ten years, principally in book stores, international
distribution, and publishing. At Valiz she focuses on production and
digital development.

pia@valiz.nl,[http://valiz.nl](http://valiz.nl/)

## Manuel Schmalstieg (CH)

Manuel Schmalstieg (1976) is an artist, designer and educator, operating
in the murky area between media art and hacker communities. A graduate
of HEAD Geneva and ASP Kraków, he founded multiple collaborative
entities, including *N3krozoft Ltd* (in 2001) and *Aether9* (in 2007).
Since 2008 he has run Greyscale Press, a postdigital publishing house.
As a web designer and free software enthusiast, he is a contributor to
the WordPress platform, and has kickstarted a lively local community in
Geneva. He is currently guest editor of *Libre Graphics Magazine*, for
an issue dedicated to the Libre Type Design movement.

## Loes Sikkes (NL)

Loes Sikkes graduated *cum laude* in Globalization and National
Identities. Since 2004 she has worked as a graphic designer, setting up
multiple design studios, such as Medamo (a young Rotterdam-based design
bureau founded in collaboration with Barbara Lateur) in 2012. Signifying
Medamo’s approach is the drive with which they translate new insights,
approaches and social involvement into a clear design. Conceptual and
strategic design solutions evolve through thorough analysis and
research. They cross the traditional borders of the profession and feel
most at home where graphic design, new media and typography meet. In
addition, she has been working at the Willem de Kooning Academy as
department coordinator of the visual communications programme, and
giving lessons on publication to the illustration department.

## Kimberley Spreeuwenberg (NL)

Kimberley Spreeuwenberg is a new media researcher and graphic designer
with a special interest in the areas where these two disciplines
intersect. She is currently project coordinator of the Digital
Publishing Toolkit research project initiated by the Institute of
Network Cultures, with whom she collaborates regularly, and teaches at
the Willem de Kooning Academy in Rotterdam.

## Matthew So (US) – Badlands Unlimited

Badlands Unlimited is a New York-based American publisher of e-books and
paperback books with an emphasis on contemporary art, culture and
politics.

The company was established in 2010 by Paul Chan, a New York-based
artist, as a platform to publish the writings and works of emerging and
established artists whom Chan respects and champions. Since 2010
Badlands has also published obscure and controversial historical works
and one romance novel.

Chan considers Badlands as not only a press but also a publishing
experiment. He has written:

‘Historical distinctions between books, files, and artworks are
dissolving rapidly. We publish and produce new works by artists and
writers that embody the spirit of this emerging dissolution. We make
books in an expanded field.’

## Danja Vasiliev (RU)

Danja Vasiliev has been involved in computer technology events, media
art exhibitions and seminars around the world since 1999. He has
received several awards and mentions at Ars Electronica, Japan Media Art
Festival, and Transmediale, and is one of the creators of Hotglue.

[http://k0a1a.net](http://k0a1a.net/)

## Patricia de Vries (NL)

Patricia de Vries is a project coordinator at the Institute of Network
Cultures and is responsible for coordinating MoneyLab: Coining
Alternatives. She has an academic background in Media Studies (BA),
Cultural Analysis (MA) and Liberal Studies (MA). She has previously
worked as a film programmer, researcher, and art magazine editor. From
2010 until 2012 she was based in New York where she worked as a research
associate at the World Policy Institute think tank and as a teaching
assistant of Professor James Miller at The New School for Social
Research.

## Oliver Wise (USA)

Oliver Wise and Eleanor Hanson are the co-founders of The Present Group,
a creative studio working at the intersection of art and technology.
They focus on devising and building systems that support creators.
Projects of The Present Group include an art subscription service, a web
hosting service that funds an intermittent arts prize, Art Micro
Patronage (an experimental exhibition platform showcasing and funding
artwork online), The People’s E-book (a free online tool for building
e-books), and Compensation Foundation (an online database for gathering
and displaying how cultural producers are compensated).

## Michael Zeder (DE)

Michael Zeder is engaged with research into and the development of tools
for an information society. He works currently on systems of knowledge
distribution and learning environments. For Superglue, Michael designed
the client-side software architecture and an interactive development
system.

<http://michaelzeder.de/>



# Call for e-books, electronic publications and related projects @ Off the Press {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
April 8, 2014 at 4:17 pm.

**Off the Press – Electronic Publishing in the Arts: Call for e-books,
electronic publications and related projects on Friday 23rd of May, from
16.30 – 17.30**

To illustrate
the scope and potential of electronic publishing we would like to invite
artists, designers, publishers and other practitioners in the field of
electronic publishing to showcase their e-books, electronic publications
and related projects in an informal setting to the public during the
Bazaar we organize at the event Off the Press.

Off the Press
will take place on the 22nd and 23rd of May 2014 at Museum Boijmans van
Beuningen and WORM in Rotterdam. It consists of a two-day conference
with speakers such as Alessandro Ludovico, Elizabeth Castro, Adam Hyde,
Badlands Unlimited and Florian Cramer, an arts & Crafts session,
workshops, and a Bazaar with Drinks. The following questions will be
addressed: How can arts publishers make their own e-publications and use
the medium in a conceptually and aesthetically interesting way? How do
new forms of digital publishing change the role of the designer? What
change is needed in your production workflow, from manuscript to
publication, if you want to switch to hybrid electronic and paper
publishing?

If you would
like to showcase your work or project at the Bazaar on Friday the 23rd
please forward your proposal (Max 1 A4, max 4 visuals, and please
indicate what technical equipment you would need) to
<kimmy@networkcultures.org>. The deadline for
proposals is the 22nd of April 2014.

Please note that contributions from abroad are welcomed. However, we
cannot offer any accommodations or travel expenses.

Off the Press:
Electronic Publishing in the Arts is part of the research project
Digital Publishing Toolkit initiated by INC. It is a network of two
applied universities and art school research departments, four Dutch art
and design publishers and several graphic and media design bureaus,
which are  working on an accessible “how-to” guide for electronic
publishing in the arts along with a collection of open source software
tools for editing and designing electronic books.



# Alle relevante data over e-books in Nederland {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Miriam
Rasch](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michael/ "Posts by Miriam Rasch"),
April 4, 2014 at 12:17 pm.

Hoe groot is het aanbod van e-books in Nederland? Hoe veel worden er
verkocht? Hoeveel e-readers een tablets zijn er in Nederland?

Het Centraal Boekhuis zet alle relevante gegevens over e-books in
Nederland in een infographic, ook te downloaden als pdf via hun
[website](http://www.cb-logistics.nl/nieuws/alle-relevante-data-over-e-books-in-nederland/).

![](imgs/internetversie.jpg)



# Converting a Docx directly to EPUB using Calibre {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
March 28, 2014 at 4:53 pm.

Recently the software Calibre added Docx to its converter as a possible
input format. Thus it’s allowed to convert directly from Docx to Epub.
The procedure is quite simple. We’ll use the[test Docx
document](http://calibre-ebook.com/downloads/demos/demo.docx) provided
by the Calibre team.

![](imgs/WO27sNlmw2vvZPxxx8Kgu_4tBsBu6hw7hi760my0Oky50IAOo8OwxbUpp7jhf77rc5U5NxhPe4sBqqhdjHYMX2LCOm1xxvUVnZUuH3EECIlbJkO-IU8VKSs4JWDCew)

Add the docx file by drag-and-dropping it into calibre. In this way
it’ll be added to your library.

Click on Convert Books in the top
bar.![](imgs/naBmT80H2RBHdTTl7hITimGg6-U_go616rWAxH_5EKiacM4ljD3r7dC63RitpYjRTggs8_Ych7fDOvYLQQJHF7qYOHxFnhtXM9iG5Io1K85OxbJHdfQFcqxN3qIOIQ)

Select “DOCX” as input format and “EPUB” as output, add metadata and
click OK.

![](imgs/MHE6obYW4_0zKncQKDUzeSlTDfrrGeNyBmJpkp2hRROy1roWQRz8zc1htIZqKpzLUqmm0MQwtCQ7ubPuOMPdNmoIWQf-ihDLCugefc-AzymvTH1ljFdNi0t4KpcgVA)

You should now be able to see EPUB on the right. Click on it to open the
epub with the Calibre viewer, right click on it to see the option to
save the file to your disk.

Now let’s have a look to the output
Epub.![](imgs/d8qMJp8dqkv37b3yd-hBN5EtNUOEHZpeQN5HRpD2Y-D6X3vOysWmaTsTSTtyd7c0GOPxFUSZRdbK7fziFUGOKHyfjBN5M1y0-jmZGfo9C8CdJ5Y07IrrQbX571KkqA)

Calibre added a default cover (with generated author and title) because
we didn’t specified any.

![](imgs/rr9W7BlgZAEscQL76OKFFnJyTiz7GStpU-oKjAS95lUaPig6fEFjMYl7gsOiwQGFpCdc4MbnJC-rShxt0K-CAXy7_mgjSDhca4sz2Y1GT4-XesWnNbdJAqPlPeROMQ)

Besides some minor glitches, all the features of the Docx document are
preserved.

Let’s have a look now into the Epub. To do so we need to unzip it. We
can either change the extension to “.zip” or use the[Epub
UnZip](http://www.mobileread.com/forums/showthread.php?t=55681&page=2)
tool.

The nice thing is that the conversion keeps (or create) a table of
contents, splitting the document in several HTML files. From the
document itself:

> There are two approaches that calibre takes when generating a Table of
> Contents. The first is if the Word document has a Table of Contents
> itself. Provided that the Table of Contents uses hyperlinks, calibre
> will automatically use it […] If no Table of Contents is found in the
> document, then a table of contents is automatically generated from the
> headings in the document. A heading is identified as something that
> has the Heading 1 or Heading 2, etc. style applied to it. These
> headings are turned into a Table of Contents with Heading 1 being the
> topmost level, Heading 2 the second level and so on.

![](imgs/S2TIqcR7eBirL26bcW2SwzhnUJ3ewKyKIF6aqSP8EFzPHdkm804viATqHDm7vvkaKj88VEU6PWRyGWt39SjKvg2QSBodMxPqJ1ZWGwO3rW_Xk53owv5WJ1M4sqBJ2w)

This means that by merging several Docx in a single one, it is possible
to obtain an Epub containing multiple chapters, therefore an entire
book.

![](imgs/6aHG-UWIlwHNlXEhIda4IGkXW7xUfXrKjU5PHklmzXfagbT3usquVm7m2k6fJ6uTwEu5q4cgsa7OsIKovuH0GkmAAmnX8PJQQvAakzokORnR_P6X7k3bh2K1S6OXVg)

The Epub obtained passes validation and it wouldn’t be too intensive to
clean its code, especially if not many styles are expressed.

![](imgs/rbOTbqoWmaf0_YyWqcoCGkj3FmY_tgsz2jTXGlMHAtiLhf9udP26uGeGW3_w4Y8ZT_d5rairVgWA2gujRER0_G3hRfbUJxSbfLoaxLY6dE1g10wTqOwGyFEIuYuBow)Metadata
should be added or modified in the content.opf file.



# Flyers arrived! {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [margreet
riphagen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/arjen/ "Posts by margreet riphagen"),
March 12, 2014 at 1:12 pm.

![](imgs/photo-e1394626295619.jpg)



# Off the Press: Electronic Publishing in the Arts {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [margreet
riphagen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/arjen/ "Posts by margreet riphagen"),
March 5, 2014 at 2:35 pm.

![](imgs/A5_OFF_THE_PRESS_web_flyer_back.jpg)

![](imgs/A5_OFF_THE_PRESS_web_flyer_front.jpg)

Institute of Network Cultures presents:



# Why E-book Distribution Is Completely and Utterly Broken (and How to Fix It) {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
March 4, 2014 at 10:50 am.

Already written
in November 2012, but still very relevant: A post by [MICHAEL
CLARKE](http://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/author/mtclarke/ "View all posts by Michael Clarke") on the politics
involved with e-book distribution. Read the full article
[here](http://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2012/11/02/why-e-book-distribution-is-completely-and-utterly-broken-and-how-to-fix-it/)

> A recent incident involving Amazon and a Norwegian reader has
> highlighted the sad state of e-book distribution on many levels. For
> those new to the story, which was broken on [Martin Bekkelund’s
> blog](http://www.bekkelund.net/2012/10/22/outlawed-by-amazon-drm/) late
> last month, a Norwegian woman named Linn (described as a friend of
> Bekkelund’s) reportedly found her Amazon account closed and all the
> e-books she had purchased via Amazon wiped from her Kindle with no
> explanation.
>
>



# Megan Hoogenboom: You and the Book {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [haroldkonickx](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/haroldkonickx/ "Posts by haroldkonickx"),
February 25, 2014 at 4:54 pm.

[Megan Hoogenboom](http://www.meganhoogenboom.nl) (Rotterdam) is a
graphic designer who explores the possibilities of digital reading,
using the ePub format. In this interview Megan gives us her view on the
challenges and possibilities of ePub. Megan wil be one of the guests of
our upcoming
[conference](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/02/save-the-date-digital-publishing-conference-2/).

 

![Video: http://vimeo.com/87566827](imgs/465673411_640.jpg)

[You and the book; some thoughts on the practice and future of
ePub](http://vimeo.com/87566827) from [network
cultures](http://vimeo.com/networkcultures) on
[Vimeo](https://vimeo.com).



# Save the Date, Digital Publishing Conference \#2 {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [margreet
riphagen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/arjen/ "Posts by margreet riphagen"),
February 10, 2014 at 10:27 am.

In May 22nd and 23rd the second event about Digital Publishing will be
held in Rotterdam. The conference will take part in the [Museum Boijmans
van Beuningen](http://www.boijmans.nl/en/). And various workshops, as
well as the artistic evening program will take part in
[Worm](http://www.worm.org/sheets/index/organisatie).

The tentative program can be found here.
http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/22-23-may-2014/



# Out now: The Unbound Book by Adriaan van der Weel & Joost Kircz {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Miriam
Rasch](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michael/ "Posts by Miriam Rasch"),
January 24, 2014 at 9:48 am.

![](imgs/ImageDisplay.jpg)

**The Unbound Book**

Published by Amsterdam University Press. Order a copy at your local
bookshop or
[online](http://www.athenaeum.nl/shop/details/The+unbound+book/9789089646002).



# Post-Digital Publishing Archive by Silvio Lorusso {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [margreet
riphagen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/arjen/ "Posts by margreet riphagen"),
January 21, 2014 at 9:28 am.

Recently Silvio Lorusso launched the Post-Digital Publishing Archive
(P-DPA). The aim of [P-DPA](http://p-dpa.net/about/) is to
systematically collect, organize and keep trace of experiences in the
fields of art and design that explore the relationships between
publishing and digital technology. The archive acts as a space in which
the collected projects are confronted and juxtaposed in order to
highlight relevant paths, mutual themes, common perspectives,
interrelations, but also oppositions and idiosyncrasies. P—DPA is
maintained by Silvio Lorusso.



# How to distribute your ebooks? {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
January 16, 2014 at 12:59 pm.

![Say "The netflix of Books" one more time](imgs/44918325.jpg)

source: http://memegenerator.net/instance/44918325



# Hacking the Academy: New Approaches to Scholarship and Teaching from Digital Humanities {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
January 14, 2014 at 9:52 am.

**About the Book**

Can an algorithm edit a journal? Can a library exist without books? Can
students build and manage their own learning management platforms? Can a
conference be held without a program? Can Twitter replace a scholarly
society?



As recently as the mid-2000s, questions like these would have been
unthinkable. But today serious scholars are asking whether the
institutions of the academy as they have existed for decades, even
centuries, aren’t becoming obsolete. Every aspect of scholarly
infrastructure is being questioned, and even more importantly, being
hacked. Sympathetic scholars of traditionally disparate disciplines are
canceling their association memberships and building their own networks
on Facebook and Twitter. Journals are being compiled automatically from
self-published blog posts. Newly minted Ph.D.s are forgoing the tenure
track for alternative academic careers that blur the lines between
research, teaching, and service. Graduate students are looking beyond
the categories of the traditional CV and building expansive professional
identities and popular followings through social media. Educational
technologists are “punking” established technology vendors by rolling
out their own open source infrastructure.

Hacking the Academy will both explore and contribute to ongoing efforts
to rebuild scholarly infrastructure for a new millennium.

**About the Editors**

Dan Cohen is an Associate Professor in the Department of History and Art
History and the Director of the Center for History and New Media at
George Mason University.

[More
information](http://www.digitalculture.org/books/hacking-the-academy-new-approaches-to-scholarship-and-teaching-from-digital-humanities/)



# nai010 uitgevers – Highlights en Reflections {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Katía
Truijen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/katiatruijen/ "Posts by Katía Truijen"),
December 3, 2013 at 10:25 am.

Het team van [nai010
Publishers](http://www.naipublishers.nl/nai010publishers/nai010_nl.html),
[Medamo](http://www.medamo.nl/) en [PUNTPIXEL](http://www.puntpixel.nl/)
ontwikkelt een digitale versie van de [Stedelijk
Museum](http://www.stedelijk.nl/) *Highlights* en *Reflections*
catalogi. In plaats van het creëren van een één op één e-book kopie,
ontwikkelen ze een digitaal distributieplatform via een (mobiele)
web-applicatie. Deze geeft de gebruikers de mogelijkheid om hun
persoonlijke hoogtepunten uit de Stedelijk collectie te vinden,
filteren, zoeken, bekijken en verzamelen. Deze serie hoogtepunten wordt
vervolgens samengevoegd tot een persoonlijke EPUB catalogus die als pdf
ook offline kan worden geraadpleegd.



![Barbera van Kooij, Photo: Martin Risseeuw](imgs/nai1.jpg)
Barbera van Kooij, Photo: Martin Risseeuw



Barbera van Kooij van nai101 publishers legt uit dat het een nieuwe en
aanvullende rol van de uitgever is om nieuwe platforms en
distriebutiemogelijkheden te verkennen. Volgens haar is het interessant
om te onderzoeken hoe we op nieuwe manieren digitaal kunnen publiceren.
De gangbare EPUB versies van bestaande boeken hebben volgens van Kooij
vaak geen toegevoegde waarde ten opzichte van een boek of pdf. De vraag
is hoe je een visuele uitgave als de catalogi van het Stedelijk vertaald
naar een digitale uitgave die meerwaarde heeft.



Daarvoor transformeerde het team het statische afgesloten product naar
een catalogus volgens het ‘mp3 model’. In plaats van de gehele catalogus
aan te schaffen kan de gebruiker straks invloed uitoefenen op de inhoud
van de gepersonaliseerde catalogus.

De grootste doelgroep van het Stedelijk is een buitenlands 50+ publiek
mét smartphone. Deze doelgroep wil zich graag vóór de reis verdiepen in
de collectie van het museum. Voor hen wordt een serviceomgeving
ontwikkeld; webpagina’s die zijn geoptimaliseerd voor smartphone
gebruik. Via een aantal keuzecriteria kan de gebruiker een selectie
maken met wat hem aanspreekt en informatie over deze verzameling
verkrijgen.

Daarnaast kan extra informatie worden aangeboden, zoals verdiepende
essays uit *Reflections*, audiofragmenten of zaalteksten bij de
afbeeldingen. Deze extra informatie kan al dan niet tegen betaling
worden toegevoegd aan de persoonlijke catalogus.

Momenteel wordt er gewerkt aan de gebruiksvriendelijkheid van de
applicatie en worden de criteria voor het selecteren van content
vastgesteld.



![Barbera van Kooij, Photo: Martin Risseeuw](imgs/nai2.jpg)
Barbera van Kooij, Photo: Martin Risseeuw



Vragen waar het team mee wordt geconfronteerd wordt zijn bijvoorbeeld
voor welke informatie de bezoeker zou willen betalen. En hoeveel zou hij
of zij hiervoor precies willen betalen? Om dit goed uit te zoeken wordt
er nu aan een pilot gewerkt. Verder moet er heel strikt worden gekeken
naar welke informatie precies tegen betaling wordt aangeboden. Content
die al op de website van het museum te vinden is, of informatie die maar
tijdelijk geldig is valt meteen af.

De rol van de uitgever is om de inhoud van de catalogus te structureren
en selecteren en om na te denken over het verdienmodel. Zo moet er een
constructie worden bedacht waarbij rekening wordt gehouden met
rechthebbenden van tekst en afbeeldingen en het uitkeren van
vergoedingen.

Uiteindelijk moet het project resulteren in een basis applicatie die
zich leent voor het ontwikkelen van allerlei nieuwe publicaties. Andere
musea en uitgevers moeten hier ook gebruik van kunnen maken.

nai010 kijkt op dit moment naar welke publicaties geschikt zouden zijn
om op deze manier uit te geven en aan te bieden. Volgens Barbera van
Kooij wordt de applicatie een bijzonder inspirerend instrument om
informatie op een andere manier beschikbaar te maken.

Het originele presentatie document (PDF) kan
[hier](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/12/06_nai010_0119-DPT-presentatie-visuals.pdf)
gevonden worden.**Bekijk de volledige presentatie hieronder**

![Video: http://vimeo.com/80985297](imgs/457024932_640.jpg)

[Showcase nai010 uitgevers – Verzamelen
Highlights](http://vimeo.com/80985297) from [network
cultures](http://vimeo.com/networkcultures) on
[Vimeo](https://vimeo.com).



# Valiz – Context Without Walls {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Katía
Truijen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/katiatruijen/ "Posts by Katía Truijen"),
November 28, 2013 at 1:59 pm.

[Valiz](http://www.valiz.nl/), [Meeus
Ontwerpt](http://www.meeusontwerpt.nl/) en
[PUNTPIXEL](http://www.puntpixel.nl/) richten zich op het creëren van
een digitale versie van twee edities van de nieuwe serie van Valiz
[*Context Without Walls.*](http://www.valiz.nl/nl/Plannen) De serie
bestaat uit acht meertalige boeken over hedendaagse internationaal
opererende kunstenaars. Elk boek is een drieluik: een inzichtelijk
essay, een case study en een beeldessay.

De printversies van *Context Without Walls* zijn gemaakt door Meeus
Ontwerpt en bevatten veel design- en conversie uitdagingen.
Moeilijkheden zijn onder andere het werken met visuele essays,
referenties in de marges van de pagina en (voet)noten. Deze uitdagingen
hebben geleid tot het maken van zowel een eenvoudige als een meer
ingewikkelde digitale versie van het e-book. Op deze manier wordt aan de
wensen van de uitgever voldaan en wordt het originele grafische ontwerp
van de serie behouden.



![Pia Pol, Photo: Martin Risseeuw](imgs/valiz3.jpg)
Pia Pol, Photo: Martin Risseeuw





Daarnaast wordt er door het team een template ontwikkeld voor het
uitbreiden van de digitale serie. Hierbij wordt geëxperimenteerd met
hyperlinks die verwijzen naar alinea’s binnen het boek én een
overkoepelend verwijssysteem, dat wellicht naar fragmenten uit alle acht
boeken uit de serie kan verwijzen. Voor de meer ingewikkelde versie
wordt uitgezocht of de tekst kan worden uitgebreid met extra beeld,
geluid en videomateriaal. Beide versies zullen worden uitgegeven in
verschillende talen om een zo groot mogelijk publiek aan te kunnen
spreken.



![Pia Pol, Photo: Martin Risseeuw](imgs/valiz2.jpg)
Pia Pol, Photo: Martin Risseeuw



Er zal dus eerst een versie worden uitgebracht die tegemoet komt aan een
deel van de wensen, zodat er daarna kan worden geëxperimenteerd met een
droom versie van de serie. Voor de eerste versie is gekozen voor het
Epub3 formaat, omdat het compatibel is met meerdere platforms en veel
vrijheid biedt voor het ontwerp.

Valiz is er nooit van uit gegaan dat de serie één op één vertaald zou
worden van analoog naar digitaal, maar het oorspronkelijke ontwerp
wilden ze wel in ere houden. Sommige dingen moesten worden aangepast om
het als e-book goed te laten werken. Zo werden de letters van de
inhoudsopgave groter zodat deze goed aan te raken zijn.

PUNTPIXEL werkte ondertussen aan een Epub generator, de ‘Epubster’. Dit
is software met een webapplicatie waarmee Valiz straks zelf aan de slag
kan met de webpublicaties. De software is speciaal ontwikkeld voor
mensen zonder technische kennis. Op deze manier kan Valiz zelf alle
edities binnen de serie opmaken. De Epub wordt gegenereerd op basis van
vooraf bepaalde stijlregels (CSS) die aansluiten op de werkwijze van de
uitgever (docx/RTF doc workflow). Tekst en beeld kunnen online worden
ingevoegd in het opmaakproces (Markdown). Door de *live preview*
mogelijkheid kan Valiz steeds terugkoppelen hoe het uiteindelijke
ontwerp eruit zal zien. Wanneer er bij nieuwe versies tóch wordt gekozen
voor veranderingen in het ontwerp, dan kan dit in het content management
systeem worden aangepast.

The original presentation file (PDF) can be found
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/11/05_VALIZ_28112013.pdf)

![Video: http://vimeo.com/80883774](imgs/458628196_640.jpg)

[Showcase Valiz – Context Without Walls – genereren van een serie
ontworpen ePubs](http://vimeo.com/80883774) from [network
cultures](http://vimeo.com/networkcultures) on
[Vimeo](https://vimeo.com).



# Joost Kircz: Het ongebonden boek aan de ketting {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [marcstumpel](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/marcstumpel/ "Posts by marcstumpel"),
November 28, 2013 at 2:06 pm.

*“Er is iets aan de hand in de boekenbranche. Eeuwen lang hadden we
stevige boeken in alle formaten die goed in de hand lagen en als
vrienden ons leven verrijkten. Nu gaat het boek de wijde wereld in.
Schud het papier af als een streng Calvinistische opvoeding en ben vrij.
Maar welke vrijheid heeft dit ongebonden boek eigenlijk? Hierover hebben
wij op de Hogeschool van Amsterdam en met het Instituut voor
Netwerkcultuur al jaren ouderlijke zorgen. Wij organiseerden twee
congressen. Een in het Engels: “[The Unbound
Book](http://e-boekenstad.nl/unbound/)”, waarvan de verhandelingen
binnenkort bij AUP uitkomen, ach ach… op papier, maar ook als saaie
elektronische versie van dat papier. Een tweede conferentie had de
vrolijke titel “[Boek uit de
band](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/unboundbook/)”. En een project
heet “[Out of Ink](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/outofink/)”, nu heeft
de ongebonden adolescent zelfs de inktpot het raam uit gegooid. Maar de
vrije wereld van los fladderende zinnen, plaatjes, films en liedjes
wordt een ondoordringbaar woud, waar iedereen elkaar roept , maar
niemand elkaar meer kan verstaan. Dit project probeert na te gaan welke
soort talige-, beeldende- of audiocommunicatie tools nodig zijn om zich
vrij te bewegen tussen papier en scherm. In dit project zoeken we uit
wat we hebben, wat we willen overdragen en welke regels en gereedschap
daar voor nodig zijn.”*



![Joost Kircz, Photo: Martin Risseeuw](imgs/11098235723_b060acda72.jpg)
Joost Kircz, Photo: Martin Risseeuw



[Joost Kircz](http://www.kra.nl/), Emeritus Lector aan de Hogeschool van
Amsterdam, wijdde zijn introductie voor de bijeenkomst over digitaal
publiceren aan de huidige status en ontwikkelingen van de gereedschappen
voor digitaal publiceren. Het online zetten van foto’s, eenvoudige PDF’s
en dergelijke valt volgens hem niet onder digitaal publiceren. De opslag
en de transport hiervan veranderen is mooi en belangrijk voor het
verdienmodel, maar er is geen sprake van een inhoudelijke ‘revolutie’.
Er is namelijk geen wezenlijke verandering in de informatieoverdracht.



Tegenwoordig kunnen we tekst manipuleren. Het aantal regels per pagina
ligt niet meer vast, terugbladeren gebeurt amper, aantekeningen blijven
beperkt en er is steeds meer mogelijk met afbeeldingen en geluid. De
vogelgids is een mooi voorbeeld van een publicatie die audiovisuele
elementen goed kan gebruiken, maar de werkelijke uitdaging zit hem
volgens Kircz in het vernieuwen van publicatievormen van
wetenschappelijke teksten en kunstboeken. Hierbij is het namelijk
essentieel om heen en weer te kunnen bladeren, zodat onderstrepingen en
aantekeningen makkelijk terug te vinden zijn.

Kircz dringt aan om verder te kijken dan de vertaalslag van papieren
naar digitale boeken. Hoe zit het bijvoorbeeld met boeken die digitaal
worden ‘geboren’? Hoewel er zijn talloze technische snufjes op de markt
die de innovatie van digitale publicaties kan dienen, is het nog steeds
lastig om te zeggen wat wij hier precies mee aanmoeten. Om dit te
onderzoeken houdt de INC subgroep, waaronder Kircz, zich momenteel bezig
met het aanleggen van een database, waarin alle elementen die men kan
herbruiken uit papieren publicaties eenduidig worden benoemd en
beschreven. Hoewel deze stapelbare eenheden zijn, vliegen zij kris kras
door elkaar, als duiven in een duiventil. Maar hoe kunnen wij al die
‘vrije vliegende objecten’ identificeren en hun relaties te benoemen?
Welke mogelijkheden bieden presentaties in andere vorm? Deze vragen
staan centraal bij het Digital Publishing Toolkit onderzoeksproject,
waarbij er aandacht wordt besteed aan zowel de werkprocessen als nieuwe
standaarden zoals [Epub3](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EPUB).

Bovendien is er nog altijd veel te doen over metadata, oftewel, gegevens
over gegevens. De uitgeefdata, zoals publicatie, auteursrecht, stijlen,
technische metadata vormen een klasse apart. Maar wat is hiervoor de
standaard? Welke structuurelementen worden er toegepast? ‘Er is een
keiharde splitsing tussen het metadata en het object’, aldus Kircz. Niet
elk scherm is hetzelfde en er zijn verschillende klassen. Emotionele en
educatieve data zijn bijvoorbeeld niet hetzelfde, maar wel beide
afhankelijk van het presentatiemedium. Om de inhoud op de juiste manier
te presenteren aan een specifiek publiek zijn in toenemende mate de
stijlontwikkelingen van belang.

Voor het onderzoeksproject [Digital Publishing
Toolkit](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/aboutus/) is het
primaire doel om te begrijpen wat wij willen laten overvloeien van
papieren naar digitale publicaties. Door het in kaart brengen van
werkprocessen, standaarden en trucs daarbinnen, komen er innovaties tot
stand. Maar welke obstakels komt men hierbij tegen? Welke gebondenheid
kent het ongebonden boek?

Bekijk de volledige presentatie hieronder

![Video: http://vimeo.com/80800588](imgs/456793688_640.jpg)

[Joost Kircz – Het ongebonden boek aan de ketting, met introductie van
Geert Lovink](http://vimeo.com/80800588) from [network
cultures](http://vimeo.com/networkcultures) on
[Vimeo](https://vimeo.com).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Oorspronkelijke introductie tekst van Joost Kircz:***Hoe vrij kan het
boek zich bewegen tussen papier en scherm.*

Geachte aanwezigen,

Vandaag hebben we het over de stap naar lezen en schrijven in een
digitale wereld. De technologische innovaties duikelen over ons heen en
de claims zijn nog hoger dan de wolken (z.g. clouds), waar al deze
digitale informatie vrij en onbevangen zou zijn opgeslagen. Ieder
feestje heeft ongeschreven regels waardoor het een succes wordt, en zo
ook het digitale uitgeven. In de afgelopen jaren hebben we op de HvA en
met het INC aan verschillende projecten gewerkt zoals het [Amsterdam
E-boekenstadproject](http://www.e-boekenstad.nl) met de twee grote
conferenties: [The Unbound Book](http://e-boekenstad.nl/unbound/),
waarvan het conferentieverslag ongeveer nu zou moeten uitkomen bij
Amsterdam University Press en het congres [Boek uit de
band](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/unboundbook/), daarnaast het
project [Out of Ink](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/outofink/) en nu
het project Gereedschap voor Digitaal uitgeven, waar we ons vandaag mee
bezig houden.

Zoals we weten is steeksleutel 13 geschikt voor je fiets, voor digitaal
uitgeven gaan we sleutels nog maken. Er is nog een standaard set
aanwezig. We moeten daarom een paar zaken goed in de gaten houden. Wat
verstaan we eigenlijk onder digitaal publiceren. Laat ik het even
nalopen en wel van makkelijk naar moeilijk. Voor alles wil ik zeggen dat
foto’s, eenvoudige PDF’s e.d. door mij niet tot echt digitaal uitgeven
worden gerekend. In dit soort gevallen veranderen we het substraat
papier door iets anders. Alleen de opslag en het transport veranderen,
mooi maar nog geen inhoudelijke revolutie in het schrijven, lezen en
uitgeven. Wel staat dit toe dat veel meer mensen heel makkelijk een
exemplaar van ene tekst of boek kunnen verkrijgen. Of ze dit ook echt
lezen is een andere vraag.

De makkelijkste invulling van digitaal uitgeven is om platte tekst van
papier naar een ander medium over te brengen. Platte tekst is plat, dat
betekent dat we weinig variatie hebben. Het font, het corps, de
interlinie, de regellengte en het aantal regels per pagina. Omdat lezen
een fysieke activiteit is, is traditioneel -door de eeuwen heen- het
boekformaat dusdanig dat het boek “lekker” in de hand ligt. We kunnen
platte tekst makkelijk omzetten naar een presentatie op een scherm
waarbij het scherm weer “prettig in de hand ligt”. Maar nu kunnen we de
tekst wel manipuleren. Afhankelijk van de bijziendheid van de lezer kan
een groter corps worden ingesteld. Terzijde: ere wie ere toekomt,
Microsofts Clear Type is in deze context geweldig. De regellengte en het
aantal regels per pagina liggen niet meer vast. Dat is mooi en we zien
dan ook dat de e-lezer met haar prachtig stilstaand beeld heel populair
wordt voor roman lezers. De tekst is en blijft primair en de lezer kan
die naar behoefte instellen. De auteur neemt de lezer bij de hand. Terug
bladeren gebeurt amper en aantekeningen zijn beperkt.

Veel moeilijker wordt het als we plaatjes, film of geluid mee willen
nemen in een uitgave. Een vogelgids is hier een mooi voorbeeld. De
traditionele vogelgids is onmiddellijk begrijpbaar in een digitale
versie, waarbij wij zowel de beelden, zoals de precieuze vorm van de
kop, de structuur en de kleuren van de veren, de vlucht en ook de zang
bij de hand kunnen hebben. Dit voorbeeld is eenvoudig omdat er een
hechte en onmiddellijke band is tussen de elementen tekst, beeld, film
en geluid. Een dergelijke stramien zou ook goed bruikbaar kunnen zijn
voor een bijen en wespen gids. Veel moeilijker wordt het al als we
educatieve of wetenschappelijke tekst hebben en in het verlengde daarvan
kunstboeken. Daar waar er een redenatie wordt opgebouwd en waarbij op
verschillende plekken in de tekst verwezen wordt naar andere mediale
objecten, is terug bladeren en heen-en-weer verwijzen essentieel. Ook
annotaties en onderstrepingen van de lezer gaan een rol spelen.
Onmiddellijk worden we hier geconfronteerd met het feit dat deze vaak
niet puur tekstuele elementen vaak meervoudig gebruikt worden in
verschillende publicaties. Zoals bijvoorbeeld een populaire cartoon, een
schilderij, of een technische of geneeskundige tekening.

U was er al bang voor en inderdaad het hoge woord moet eruit. Als wij
mediale elementen, van welk soort dan ook, willen hergebruiken en
meervoudig gebruiken dan moeten wij ze eenduidig benoemen, ze een
eenduidige beschrijving geven en in een gestandaardiseerde vorm gieten.
En dan heet zo’n verzameling stapelbare eenheden een Databank of in het
jargon een Database. Over de inrichting van zo’n databank hoeven we het
hier niet te hebben, die kan lokaal zijn, in de wolken, of op de NSA
servers in Washington D.C. De enige eisen zijn: een welgedefinieerd
object, een eenduidige beschrijving EN de haakjes en oogjes om het vast
te pakken en op de juiste plaats tussen de andere objecten te zetten.
Dat heet dus koppeling of hyperlinking. Hergebruik en meervoudig gebruik
zijn de kenmerken van de volgende stap in digitaal uitgeven. Uiteraard
is dit geen klein bier. Want willen we wel precies gelijke eenheden
hergebruiken of willen we er zelf iets aan toevoegen of veranderen, al
is het maar een pijl op een beeld om de aandacht van een detail te
benadrukken.

We hebben, beste aanwezigen, het nog steeds over het transponeren van
een papieren boek naar een elektronische vorm. Maar is dit de toekomst?
Nee toch, we willen het ook hebben over echt nieuwe elektronische
boeken. Boeken dus die digitaal geboren worden en waarvan alleen delen
aan het traditionele papier toevertrouwd kunnen worden. Nu wordt het pas
echt spannend, want we mogen ons niet blind staren op wat de techniek NU
wel of niet kan en bedenken wat zou kunnen met enkel de aanwezige
hulpmiddelen. We moeten als auteurs en redacteuren denken wat we zouden
willen uitdrukken en daar software middelen bij (laten) ontwerpen.
Daarom is de discussie over gereedschap dat we vandaag voeren ook zo
belangrijk. Alle elementen die samen een coherente digitale uitgave
zullen gaan vormen zweven als intellectuelen vrij rond, maar meer nog
dan pen en papier vereist een digitaal platvorm dat we ten eerste -zoals
boven al genoemd- goed weten wat die elementen precies zijn en hoe ze
aan elkaar te rijgen zijn binnen verschillende schermomgevingen. In een
verdere toekomst kunnen we dan gaan bedenken hoe we elementen tijdens
het hergebruik kunnen gaan veranderen in aangepaste vormen, die op hun
beurt weer door anderen kunnen worden hergebruikt.

Maar vandaag staan we met de voeten op de natte Nederlandse bodem. We
bespreken de mogelijkheden en processen om de overstap naar een andere
presentatie van dezelfde boodschap in andere vorm aan te vatten. Daarom
gaat het ook over werkprocessen en min-of-meer stabiele standaards zoals
Epub3. Maar weest gewaarschuwd!: alle standaarden met een nummer hebben
de neiging door te nummeren. Vooralsnog is de droom van vrij zwevende
informatie- en kennisobjecten die wij naar bevind van omstandigheid,
humeur, publiek of mode kunnen samenvoegen tot een fluïde stroom een
droom.

Het is makkelijk te begrijpen. Neem een groot duiventil, liefst zo’n
oude duiventoren die bij kloosters gebruikt werd als voorloper van de
intensieve veeteelt, de duiven zitten daar netjes op hun nest en zijn
individueel herkenbaar, stapelbare en aftelbare eenheden. De digitale
knal heeft ze opgeschrikt en ze vliegen nu kris kras door elkaar in de
open ruimte. Onze eerste taak is om al de vrij vliegende objecten
eenduidig te identificeren, hun vluchtpatronen in kaart te brengen en
hun relaties te benoemen. Uiteindelijk willen we leren in formaties te
vliegen. Je zou bijna de oude VVD verkiezingsleus van de plank halen:
“Vrijheid in Gebondenheid”. Voor digitale objecten is deze leus in ieder
geval zeer van toepassing. Verder is voor mij de rol van de VVD voor
elektronisch uitgeven niet zo groot, al zouden ze natuurlijk het lage
BTW tarief voor e-boeken moeten bepleiten.

Waar komen we dus in onze werkervaringsstages op uit? Allereerst de
notie van metadata, gegevens over gegevens. Metadata zijn er in soorten
en maten. Als domeinafhankelijke trefwoorden-essentieel voor
zoekopdrachten. Deze kunnen alleen door de auteur of een redacteur
worden toegevoegd. Dan de administratieve metadata, die weer
uiteenvallen in auteursnamen, -adressen,- kenmerken, enz. Deze eisen een
standaardisatie die boven een vakdomein uitstijgt. Maar ook de
uitgeefdata zoals publicatiedatum, versie, type auteursrecht, e.d. zijn
overkoepelende metatdata. Denk maar eens aan de chaos door de
verschillende stijlen om bibliografische referenties aan te geven. Ook
de technische metadata vormen een klasse. Welk alfabet, welke codering
(ASCII, uni code), welke standaard, welke structuur elementen en ga zo
maar door. Van het grootste belang is dat er een keiharde splitsing is
tussen het mediaal object en de beschrijving van haar presentatie. Op
papier staat een uitroep tussen aanhalingstekens, op een scherm kan dit
rood zijn en flikkeren; maar niet elk scherm is hetzelfde. Derhalve zijn
de metadata die de opmaak en de presentatie beschrijven een eigen klasse
geworden. De auteur, redacteur of uitgever kan eenzelfde publicatie
afhankelijk van het presentatiemedium een geheel eigen smoel geven. Dat
betekent dat ook de emotionele of de educatieve ervaring bij de lezer
anders en afhankelijk kan zijn van het soort presentatiemedium. De extra
culturele waarde hiervan kunnen we nog niet overzien.

Voor een blik in de toekomst is de spelontwikkeling van belang. Het in
elkaar overlaten lopen van beelden, zoals bij morphing, en het werken
met hetzelfde materiaal op verschillende niveaus kan een enorm
potentieel vormen voor de vormgeving van een educatief of zelfs een
literair vertoog. Maar ook hier geldt weer dat we primair moeten
begrijpen wat we willen laten overvloeien en waarom. Helaas bestaat de
rijstebrijberg die ons scheidt van het digitale Nirvana uit taaie kost
van werkprocessen, informatiebenoemingen en -registratie, standaards en
trucs. Maar daarbinnen kunnen we zeker nu al tot frivole nieuwe dingen
komen. Wel moeten we bij iedere stap heel duidelijk onder ogen zien, wat
deze stap mogelijk maakt en welke mogelijkheden ze uitsluiten. Het gaat
dus heel erg, net als in de politiek om “welke gebondenheid” we kiezen.
Geautomatiseerde systemen zijn gevaarlijk dat weet u. Onder de leuze
“wat kan dat gebeurt”, zien we hoe de vrijheid van expressie onder
digitale surveillance staat, zoals dat eufemistisch heet. We moeten
zorgen dat ons gereedschap het pad van een arabesk Nirvana hakt en dat
we niet eindigen in een Germaans Walhalla. Ook hier is het medium niet
alleen de boodschap, maar ook de wegbereider. We gaan vandaag bespreken
waar we nu mee bezig zijn en hoe we zoekend verder komen.

Ik wens u een heel inspirerende dag toe.



# Institute of Network Cultures – One thousand and One workflows {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [marcstumpel](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/marcstumpel/ "Posts by marcstumpel"),
November 28, 2013 at 4:30 pm.

The final presentation of the Digital Publishing Toolkit meeting, [the
ABC of digital
publishing](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/11/het-abc-van-digitaal-publiceren-bijeenkomst-28-november-programma/),
was held by [Miriam Rasch](http://www.miriamrasch.nl/), publication
manager at the Institute of Network Cultures. In her talk, she addressed
workflows, format conversion, finding the ideal format, metadata and how
to put these all together. According to Rasch, the great diversity of
input and output formats that are available today, calls for digital
publishers to have a flexible workflow, instead of a single defined path
to follow.



![Miriam Rasch, Photo: Martin
Risseeuw](imgs/11099241894_5b5833e64b_z.jpg)
Miriam Rasch, Photo: Martin Risseeuw



Taking the Silvio Lorusso’s idea of the ‘[Book as a
Directory](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/05/the-book-as-directory)‘
as starting point, the main goal of the INC subgroup (consisting of
Michael Murtaugh, Joost Kircz, Silvio Lorusso, Miriam Rasch and Kimmy
Spreeuwenberg) is to define the workflow for INC publications. In doing
so, the aim is to make it easier for everyone involved (editors,
designer and INC staff) to ‘natively’ output digital publications, as
well as to provide insights about digital publication workflows, which
can be useful for publishing houses.



Considering the fact that [Adobe
InDesign](http://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adobe_InDesign) is still central
to the workflow of many publishers, INC’s experiments with new
publication forms started with by applying an Indesign-Centric Workflow
to the development of the [Epub](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EPUB)
version of the [Unlike Us
Reader](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/07/unlike-us-reader-in-epub-format/)
print publication. (Read elaborate notes on the conversion
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/05/epub-development-in-adobe-indesign-cs6/)).
This process actually turned out to be quite sloppy with a lot of manual
labour, e.g. adding hyperlinks. Consequentially, INC realized that it
would be much more effective to have a modified HTML centric workflow,
with structured content in each phase and a file format that is
maintained throughout the entire process.



![Html Centric Workflow, INC Subgroup](imgs/htmlcentricworkflow.jpg)
Html Centric Workflow, INC Subgroup



This file format should then easily serve as the basis for a printed
publication as well as an epub. But, how is this possible with many
authors submitting their work in a Word file?

One solution, albeit not the holy grail, is to use
[MarkDown](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown), a rather simple
markup language, comparable to HTML. According to Rasch MarkDown is
perfect for text -based editors, like herself, and at the same time very
suitable for making digital products. It has a great level of
readability, while maintaining a strict content structure. Then again,
most authors will keep working with Word instead of Markdown editors
like [Mou](http://mouapp.com/). Therefore Rasch stressed the need for
ways to convert Word documents to the Markdown format. INC´s research
into file formats and conversions is documented on the [Digtial
Publishing Toolkit blog](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing).

The INC subgroup has also started to develop a specific INC set of
metadata, which can be useful to manage contents and output custom
versions of the publications. They started by referring to a broad
Document Type Definition (DTD), similar to that of
[Elsevier](http://www.elsevier.com/author-schemas/elsevier-xml-dtds-and-transport-schemas),
but eventually derived the metadata directly from all the available
content. Compiling a condensed list of about 10-20 metadata that
specifically refer to INC readers, was helpful in understanding the
essential and wanted metadata for INC´s digital publications, and to
figure out what´s ´special´ about the list of INC publications (for
example, the various inputs, like video, blogs, interviews, texts etc).
The set of metadata is applicable to other publications, but could also
prove useful for publishers in general.



![INC, condensed metadata set](imgs/incmetadataset.jpg)
INC, condensed metadata set



In addition to this list, INC has considered the idea of embedding
metadata directly into MarkDown documents. In this line of thought,
Michael and Silvio created a mockup of a customized Markdown editor. But
should filing and tagging articles accordingly with the metadata be ´the
end´? Are there other unexplored possibilities?

Rasch explained how the subgroup´s research is shifting away from the
middle of the workflow to it´s very beginning. It´s the collaborative,
back and forth process, between author, editor, designer and proof
reader, that marks the publishing workflow. Word could be considered as
´the battlefield´, where many revisions leads to more comments,
annotations and corrections. To map the complexities in the workflows,
INC has started to take more role-oriented perspective, leading to new
questions, such as: how to handle editing in Markdown? Should everyone
involved in the workflow start using Markdown editors? These are the
kinds of questions the subgroup will increasingly focus on.

Some team members recently participated in the [Free Libraries For Every
Soul](http://impakt.nl/nl/festival/2013-festival/program-2013-festival/capitalism-catch-22-programme/special-projects/free-libraries-for-every-soul/)
hackathon at IMPAKT where some ideas were developed around epub and the
creating new kinds of publications. One outcome was an epub generated
out of INC´s [Flickr
feed](http://www.flickr.com/photos/networkcultures/). In the future this
kind of event-related content could be merged into customized versions
of publications, such as an author page, where one could find all of the
available related material (biography, writings for the reader,
presentation video´s from Vimeo, Flickr Photo´s, related blogposts).

Another concept -at the end of the workflow- was to take the idea the
epub format as input to an extreme, and apply it to relatively new
genre, the ´book trailer´. This resulted in the creation of the [epub
Book Trailer
Generator](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/11/free-library-for-every-soul-hackaton-first-report/),
which manipulates a publication´s metadata with scripts, to generate a
´subliminal´ book GIF trailer.



![Unlike Us Reader Epub Trailer](imgs/trailer-Unlike-Us-Reader.gif)
Unlike Us Reader Epub Trailer



*Do you have feedback, comments or questions regarding the Digital
Publishing Toolkit research project?* [Let us
know](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/contact/)!\*

The original presentation file (PDF) can be found
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/11/07.INC_presentation_toolkit.pdf)**Watch
the full presentation below**

![Video: http://vimeo.com/80884524](imgs/456897599_640.jpg)

[Showcase Institute of Network Cultures – One thousand and One
workflows](http://vimeo.com/80884524) from [network
cultures](http://vimeo.com/networkcultures) on
[Vimeo](https://vimeo.com).



# Florian Cramer – De uitdagingen van e-publishing voor kunst- en designuitgevers {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Katía
Truijen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/katiatruijen/ "Posts by Katía Truijen"),
November 28, 2013 at 8:04 pm.

Wie naar binnen kijkt in de kunstboekhandel van nu ziet het volgende:
een lege ruimte met enkele boeken die niet langer in kasten zijn
geschoven maar als kunstobjecten zijn uitgestald. Volgens [Florian
Cramer](https://twitter.com/florian_cramer) betreden we hier een
gevaarlijk kerkhof die de dood van het papieren boek als gebruiksobject
inluidt.

De ontwikkeling richting e-publishing is niet iets van de toekomst, maar
is al in volle gang en alomtegenwoordig. Een goed voorbeeld is het
[E-flux journal](http://www.e-flux.com/journals/), een gratis
elektronisch kunsttijdschrift dat een belangrijke rol speelt in het
internationale debat over hedendaagse kunst. Of
[Speculations](http://www.speculations-journal.org/current-issue/), dat
vanaf het begin al veel aandacht kreeg, juist omdat het elektronisch
wordt verspreid. Nu al wordt er volgens Cramer meer elektronisch dan van
papier gelezen. Tijdschriften bestaan vooral nog als
advertentiemogelijkheid voor galeries. Een ander voorbeeld is de
populaire [Aaaaarg.org](http://grr.aaaaarg.org/txt/) bibliotheek waar
studenten theorieboeken gratis downloaden. Florian Cramer: “Elektronisch
uitgeven is een hype. Het probleem is dat er vaak naar de verkeerde kant
van het fenomeen wordt gekeken. De lezers zijn er wel, de makers nog
niet.”



![Florian Cramer, Photo: Martin Risseeuw](imgs/florian.jpg)
Florian Cramer, Photo: Martin Risseeuw





Problemen die men bij het maken van e-books vaak tegenkomt zijn de
technische beperkingen van platforms en de duurzaamheid van een bepaald
bestandsformaat. Moet je een e-book offline of online aanbieden? Je hebt
immers niet altijd en overal internetverbinding. In het ideale geval is
een formaat geschikt voor elk medium, maar zeker als je interactieve
elementen wil toevoegen ben je al gauw gebonden aan een bepaald
platform.

Hoe interactiever een e-book wordt, hoe hoger ook de designkosten
worden. Dit is lastig wanneer een publicatie slechts in een kleine
oplage door een specifieke doelgroep wordt gelezen. Voor veel uitgevers
in de culturele sector is dit behoorlijk problematisch.

Om te voorkomen dat een e-book steeds moet worden aangepast naar een
nieuwe versie, is het belangrijk om toe te werken naar een duurzaam
e-publishing model. Het is niet slim om voor bestandsformaten te kiezen
die maar korte tijd worden gebruikt. Het web is bijvoorbeeld een prima
platform voor de korte termijn, maar het is niet duurzaam. Websites die
vijf of tien jaar geleden zijn gepubliceerd zijn vaak niet meer
beschikaar. Eigenlijk zou je toe willen werken naar een product dat
tussen het web en het klassieke boek in staat: bestanden die lezers
kunnen bewaren en op lange termijn steeds weer kunnen raadplegen.



![Florian Cramer, Photo: Martin Risseeuw](imgs/florian2.jpg)
Florian Cramer, Photo: Martin Risseeuw



Daarvoor zijn goed gestructureerde formaten nodig. Het wordt ook voor
kleine uitgevers interessant wanneer er één werkwijze voor e-publicaties
komt en één bestandsformaat dat gemakkelijk te vertalen is naar zowel
papieren als elektronische versies. Op deze manier kan een ontwerper
snel aan de slag.

Om dit te kunenn bereiken moeten uitgevers volgens Cramer de gehele
workflow veranderen. DPT, Word en InDesign staan dan niet meer centraal.
Het metaformaat XML is geschikt om verschillende bestandsformaten mee te
creëren, maar is complex om mee te werken, zelfs voor informatici. Een
pragmatische oplossing is
[MultiMarkDown](http://fletcherpenney.net/multimarkdown/), een
vereenvoudigd alternatief waarmee platte tekst op een simpele manier kan
worden opgemaakt.

Een belangrijke misvatting is dat elektronisch publiceren per definitie
goedkoper is dan een analoge uitgave. Volgens Cramer kunnen betere
workflows het proces wel economisch voordeliger maken. Het vinden van
goede verdienmodellen is nog steeds een probleem en moet verder worden
onderzocht.

Volgens Cramer moet interactiviteit alleen worden toegevoegd als het
werkelijk meerwaarde oplevert; *“Interactivity is no magic bullet.”* Het
feit dat een publicatie niets oplevert als het op het web wordt
gepubliceerd mag geen argument zijn om er een (betaald) e-book van te
maken.

Verder wordt er nog altijd in oude publicatieformaten gedacht. De
dichtbundel ontstond omdat het te duur was om één gedicht te
distribueren. Dit is nu geen issue meer. Door de opkomst van mp3 kopen
mensen niet langer full-lenght albums, maar losse nummers. Dit model is
ook van toepassing op zoiets als een artikel, essay of gedicht. Waarom
zou je nog één catalogus van een expositie maken als de gebruiker zijn
eigen catalogus kan samenstellen? En waarom zou je één tijdschrift maken
als je de lezer ook kunt laten kiezen welke artikelen hij of zij
interessant vindt?

De economie van het drukwerk bestaat niet meer. Waarin nu werkelijk *de
waarde* van een tijdschrift ligt, is iets waar we nu veel scherper over
na moeten denken dan in het verleden.

*Florian Cramer werkt met nai010 Publishers, Medamo en PUNTPIXEL aan een
digitale versie van de Stedelijk Museum Highlights Catalogus. In plaats
van het creëren van een 1:1 e-book kopie van de catalogus, ontwikkelen
ze een digitaal distributieplatform via een (mobiele) web-applicatie.
Daarnaast wordt de software Open Source en komt er een stap-voor-stap
introductie e-publishing voor ‘dummies’.*

The original presentation file (PDF) can be found
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/11/03_DPT_fcramer.pdf)
**Watch the full presentation below (in Dutch)**

![Video: http://vimeo.com/80873921](imgs/458628018_640.jpg)

[Florian Cramer – E-publishing voor kunst en design (uitdagingen
2013)](http://vimeo.com/80873921) from [network
cultures](http://vimeo.com/networkcultures) on
[Vimeo](https://vimeo.com).



# BISPublishers: Over lettertype gebruik, spread layout, beeldgebruik en interactie {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [marcstumpel](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/marcstumpel/ "Posts by marcstumpel"),
November 28, 2013 at 4:29 pm.

De uitgeverij [BIS](http://www.bispublishers.nl/) vormt samen met het
webdesignbureau [Restruct](http://restruct.nl/), service designbureau
[Essense](http://essense.eu/) en webdeveloper [Mr
Sauli](http://mrsauli.nl/) de project subgroep BISpublishers.

Uitgeverij BIS is typisch een visuele uitgever, met een specialisatie in
het uitgeven van vakboeken voor creatieve professionals, academische
boeken, business boeken en boeken voor het algemeen publiek ( zoals
‘gift’ boeken). Engelstalige boeken in Amerika is voor hen de grootste
markt. Uitgeverij BIS is de E-book markt aan het verkennen, die zich
razendsnel ontwikkelt.



![BISpublishers subgroup, Photo: Martin
Risseeuw](imgs/11098483866_c6afec5f60_z.jpg)
BISpublishers subgroup, Photo: Martin Risseeuw



BISPublishers is begonnen met een kort onderzoek naar de wereld van
‘digital publishing’. Uit dit onderzoek zijn inzichten gewonnen die de
basis vormden voor de ideale formaat keuze, platform en device(s) met
betrekking tot twee digitale publicaties, waar zij momenteel aan werken.
De belangrijkste vragen ten grondslag van dit onderzoek: Hoe kunnen we
de e-reading experience verbeteren? Hoe we kunnen we ‘rich media’
content het beste verwerken? Hoe kunnen we interactieve publicaties
beschikbaar maken op verschillende devices tegen redelijke kosten? Welke
ontwerp tools gaan wij hiervoor inzetten? Welke devices willen wij ons
op richten?



De subgroep het heeft het digitale traject van auteur/publisher tot de
uiteindelijke lezer gevisualiseerd. Dit verloop is complex gebleken,
aangezien er veel trajecten mogelijk zijn en er constant nieuwe bij
komen. Door het in kaart brengen van verschillende eindgebruikers en
segmenten kwamen zij bij specifieke formaten terecht, zoals
[Epub](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EPUB) en standalone apps.



![BISPublishers, Digital Landscap Journey](imgs/digitalpublishing.jpg)
BISPublishers, Digital Landscap Journey



De eerste case study, de publicatie -[Think Like a Lawyer, Don’t Act
Like One](http://thinklikealawyer.info/)- zit tussen een ‘business’ en
een’ gift’ boek in en behandelt 75 onderhandelingskwesties. Bij het
digitaal publiceren van dit boek was het uitgangspunt om een
vormgevingsgetrouwe e-book conversie te realiseren, waarbij het
lettertype gebruik, de spread-layout en het beeldgebruik zoveel zou
worden behouden. Developer Sauli Warmerhoven ([Mr.
Sauli](http://mrsauli.nl/)) bouwde een [EPUB3
generator](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/epub_generator)
om de pagina opmaak voor dit boek te automatiseren.

Bij -Think Like a Lawyer, Don’t Act Like One- heeft de projectgroep
gekozen voor een eenduidige structuur, waardoor het een template-matig
boekje werd. Het kleine formaat (b5) was uitermate geschikt voor
conversie. Daarom is er gekozen voor het Epub formaat. Hoewel de Epub
generator nog verder kan worden ontwikkeld ([met de broncode beschikbaar
op Github](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/epub_generator))
en de resultaten work-in-progress zijn, heeft de projectgroep aan de
hand van deze case al wel conclusies getrokken:

**1.** Als je een Epub ontwikkelt moet je onthouden dat hij zal worden
bekeken op e-readers. Je zal daarom rekening moeten houden met de
navigatie. Voor de ontwerper/publisher is het verstandig om de aanwezige
navigatie functionaliteit te gebruiken, in plaats van nieuwe
navigatiefuncties toe te voegen die mogelijk kan conflicteren met de
aanwezig functionaliteit.

**2.**
[Epub3](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EPUB#Version_3.0_.28current_version.29)
en standaard formaten maken het mogelijk om meer controle uit te oefenen
op het ontwerp, maar het is niet geschikt voor grotere boeken.

**3.** De huidige Epub reader applicaties ondersteunen momenteel geen
interactieve elementen die zouden kunnen worden toegevoegd aan pagina’s
(zoals video’s of afbeeldingen-carrousels).

De tweede
publicatie -[Sketching](http://www.sketching.nl/bookDrawing.html)- is
een tekenleerboek voor (industrieel) ontwerpers, van de auteurs Koos
Eissen and Roselien Steur (TU Delft). Het boek, waarmee (industrieel)
ontwerpen kunnen leren schetsen, is in geprinte vorm 100.000 keer
verkocht en in 7 talen vertaald. Dit boek heeft BISpublishers omgezet
naar interactieve ervaring. Hierbij was de opdracht om een zeer visueel
e-learning boek te ontwikkelen waarbij verschillende tekentechnieken in
beeld worden gebracht. Daarnaast werden onder andere de interactie
mogelijkheden onderzocht zoals een sociale elementen, layered pagina
opmaak, navigatie en video.

Het doel was om deze productie non-lineair aan te pakken met een focus
op tablets en navigatie. Het boek werd opgedeeld in schets ‘exercises’
en ‘skills’. Door deze zijn verwerkt in het interactieontwerp kan je als
lezer verschillende stappen nemen, zoals makkelijk terugnavigeren naar
bepaalde oefeningen, of inspringen op basis van je eigen skills(et). Het
idee is dan ook om rekening te houden met verschillende typen lezers en
ontwerpers met verschillende of specifieke skills.

BISpublishers heeft voor deze publicatie in applicatie vorm niet gekozen
voor het Epub formaat, maar voor een gratis open source web framework:
[Phonegap](http://phonegap.com/). Hiermee konden zij het boek in website
vorm omzetten, ofwel verpakken, in applicatie formaat. Dit werd mede
mogelijk gemaakt door [Adobe PhoneGapp
Build](https://build.phonegap.com/).

De resultaten van de eerste experimenten met Phonegap voor Sketching
zijn veelbelovend. Er kwam een goedwerkende applicatie uitgerold, die op
diverse manieren te presenteren is, in verschillende segmenten. De app
werd daarnaast automatisch gekoppeld aan de iOS store. BISPublisher liep
bij het testen nog wel tegen wat ‘performance issues’ aan, zoals de
reactietijd van de app bij ingewikkelde interacties, maar bij de
Sketching publicatie zijn zij nog niet tegen limieten van PhoneGap
aangelopen. Zij hoefden relatief weinig aan te passen, om een native app
te ontwikkelen voor meerdere platformen. Hoewel je als uitgever zodanig
bent aangewezen op Adobe, is het een voordeel met HTML en CSS heel veel
kan doen. Dit zijn bekende programmeertalen, dus ontwikkelaars kunnen
daar snel mee aan de haal. Native code schrijven zou veel meer tijd in
beslag nemen. Bovendien kan je als uitgever op deze wijze makkelijk en
met minder kosten een boek distribueren, mocht dit wenselijk zijn. Naast
HTML en CSS blijft de koppeling met andere formaten (zoals XML of
[MultiMarkDown](http://fletcherpenney.net/multimarkdown/)) heel goed
mogelijk.

BISPublishers is van plan om PhoneGap verder testen en uit te zoeken of
zij -Sketching- volledig met PhoneGap gaan publiceren. Deze aanpak zorgt
er in ieder geval voor dat zij zich iets minder hoeven te focussen op de
technische ontwikkeling en de conversie tussen verschillende formaten,
waardoor er meer tijd en aandacht kan worden besteed aan de content.

The original presentation file (PDF) can be found
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/11/04_BIS-Publisherssmallpdf.com_.pdf)**Watch
the full presentation below**

![Video: http://vimeo.com/80883773](imgs/456897264_640.jpg)

[Showcase BISPublishers – Over lettertype gebruik, spread layout,
beeldgebruik en interactie](http://vimeo.com/80883773) from [network
cultures](http://vimeo.com/networkcultures) on
[Vimeo](https://vimeo.com).



# First results and thoughts on using PhoneGap for e-publications {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [timoklok](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/timoklok/ "Posts by timoklok"),
November 15, 2013 at 5:52 pm.

For the SketchingBook project, we (Restruct, Mr.Sauli, Arjen De Jong)
decided to explore the possibilities of producing a publication in app
form through PhoneGap. These are the first results:



**Why & What PhoneGap**

> ” PhoneGap is a mobile development framework that enables software
> programmers to build applications for mobile devices using JavaScript,
> HTML5, and CSS3, instead of device-specific languages such as
> Objective-C or Java. The resulting applications are hybrid, meaning
> that they are neither truly native (because all layout rendering is
> done via web views instead of the platform’s native UI framework) nor
> purely web-based (because they are not just web apps, but are packaged
> as apps for distribution and have access to native device APIs). “

([wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PhoneGap))

**Why did we decide on PhoneGap:**

This decision was made based on requirements for the publication:

-   Offering a richer environment than the existing paper book: embedded
    video, smooth (swipe) interaction
-   We wanted to explore the possibilities of a modular purchase model,
    allowing for individual chapters to be bought (or added to the
    publication later on).
-   Some ‘smart’ components, for instance having the publication store
    which chapters have been read by the viewer.
-   Allow for a non-linear navigation, that would also store the path
    the viewer has taken through the chapters, so they could take a
    side-step into a different chapter but always be able to return to
    their starting point.
-   The publication relies heavily on full color image media, and less
    on text, there’s no need for reflowable pages. Tablets – rather the
    e-readers – are the obvious end-device for reading this publication.

In the scope of digital publication options, ranging from simple pdf’s
to full native apps, producing through PhoneGap seems a viable option
for this publication since:

-   It, in principle, allows the interaction listed in the requirements.
-   Is written in HTML/JS/CSS, so (within our team there’s) no need to
    learn new languages. The code is easy to share and adapt.
-   There’s no need for heavy interaction with hardware components such
    as camera, sensors etc (for which native code would be more
    suitable)
-   Producing a native app would probably be more expensive, less
    durable, with fewer reusable components.
-   It is (ideally) easy to produce a publication for different
    platforms.
-   For future publications, it seems easier to link such a HTML project
    to a database from which other publication forms are created (pdf’s,
    ePub, sites) then with a native app.

However, PhoneGap is also known to render slower in comparison to native
apps (because of the web view rendering), so test are needed to see how
far we can push the interaction.

**First results -\> PhoneGap Build**

After Adobe purchased PhoneGap, they have released the online [PhoneGap
Build](https://build.phonegap.com/) system. This allows user to upload a
zip file containing the HTML/JS/CSS files, and produces an app for iOS
and Android. This service for free for every user that only maintains a
single project, afterwards a subscription is required (but free for
unlimited open source projects).

To produce an iOS app (which is our first focus for this project), an
Apple developer account is always required (costing around 90e year).

The first results with this service were promising: after [enabling
hardware
acceleration](http://phonegap-tips.com/articles/force-hardware-acceleration-with-translate3d-sometimes.html)
for elements that move via CSS, and making sure video files were
[correctly
encoded](https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/technotes/tn2224/_index.html),
sliding to the next page appeared reasonably smooth (through buttons as
well as swipe gestures). Those different ‘pages’ are actually elements
on a single HTML document. Storing user data via
[localstorage](http://diveintohtml5.info/storage.html) also worked as
expected.

In anticipation of the final design & content, next step was to test the
possibilities of in app purchases for the different chapters:

**Progressing & moving to Xcode**

At this moment, the PhoneGap Build service doesn’t provide the plugins
needed to connect to the iOS store for in app purchases. Those plugins
do exists, but it means the ‘compiling’ of the app must be done locally,
using Apple development environment XCode, allowing the use of custom
plugins.

Switching from PhoneGap Build to Xcode was a painstaking experience,
since developing for the latest iOS version (7), requires besides all
the iOS SDK en PhoneGap libraries the latest Xcode version, which in
turn only runs on OSX Mavericks, so a complete system update was needed
before we could reach the same results as with PhoneGap Build.

After adding a dummy purchase option to the app (registering this on the
Apple Dev. centre) it was fairly simple to complete a purchase by using
[this](https://github.com/j3k0/PhoneGap-InAppPurchase-iOS/blob/master/README.md)
Javascript sample. This however was only possible after providing Apple
with all our bank and tax details, even for test purposes. Since the
purchase consists only of a payment and callback through the Apple
store, the action following the purchase is completely customisable. In
our case, we succeeded downloading a new file into the app from our
server. Because of Apple’s policy of checking all apps before releasing
them to the Apple store, such an action would probably mean this app
would be rejected. Alternatives are to have Apple host the downloadable
content for you, or packaging the complete content within the initial
app, and unlocking that content partly when purchased.

The latter option is the most simple, because there’s no need to
download a new series of files into the app and correctly linking them
to the existing content. Downside would be that all the content has to
be ready on the first launch of the app, and the total filesize would
increase dramatically. On the other hand, users would never have to
download new (large) packages (for instance if they are on a 3G
network). Also, we estimate a total size under 500MB for all content
which is not that large in comparison to other rich media
publications/apps.

More results will follow as soon as further decisions have been made
concerning content and design!



# Epub Trailer Generator – “Free Library for Every Soul” Hackaton – First Report {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
November 11, 2013 at 1:02 pm.



![Unlike Us Reader Epub Trailer](imgs/trailer-Unlike-Us-Reader.gif)

![](imgs/dpt2013.jpg)

On the 2nd and 3rd of November, the INC subgroup ([Silvio
Lorusso](https://www.facebook.com/postdigitalpublishingarchive?fref=ts),
[Michael Murtaugh](http://automatist.org/kiss/), Kimmy Spreeuwenberg,
Margreet Riphagen) attended the hackathon [Free Libraries for Every
Soul](http://monnik.org/Free-Libraries-for-Every-Soul/solo), in Utrecht,
which was part of the Impakt festival. Here’s the description of the
project proposed by us:

> Situated in the “Digital Publishing Toolkit” project the subgroup
> ‘Book as Directory’ concerns itself with workflows for digital
> publications that move beyond putting a print PDF online. We want to
> explore the creative tension between the strict constraints and
> particularities of epub as an output format and the diversity of
> possible tools and practices that can be employed to produce them.
> Starting from specific materials from the Institute of Network
> Cultures (INC) including publications (in both word processor and page
> layout formats), web blogs, and video event recordings, we will be
> using the diversity of the participants knowledge and work practices
> to produce as many different workflows (and their resulting outcomes)
> as possible. In doing so, we will make use of a diverse toolbox of
> free software tools taken from different practices (graphic design,
> informatics, linguistics, text editing, blogging, library sciences,
> statistics, reverse engineering). The final outcome will be compiled
> into an epub cookbook demonstrating a tasty palette of possible
> digital publishing workflows.



Starting from the main goal of diversifying the array of digital
publishing workflows for epub, we worked on several concepts that
explored both the production of a publication in a digital format and
the management and manipulation of ready made e-books.

This post represents the first report on the concept developed during
the hackathon. More will follow!

(For a comprehensive overview on each project developed during the
hackaton, check [André Castro’s
report](http://pinknoi.so/post/5).)

## Epub Trailer Generator

During the hackaton we discussed the possible outputs that could derive
from well-structured content. Thinking beforehand of those outputs would
influence the structuring of the content.

In our discussion we didn’t limit the outputs and the sources to what is
generally considered a publication: we considered as well Flickr
streams, contact spreadsheets, etc.

We also realize that open format like Epub could be easily accessed and
harvested for content, in other ways than the mere linear reading. So we
started to think of ePub as an input/source that could be manipulated by
scripts.

In order to take the idea of Epub as input to the extreme, we needed a
very different output from an e-book. Therefore we chose the “book
trailer” relatively new genre, different from a theory publication both
as format and as attitude.

We developed a small [python
script](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/Epub-Trailer/blob/master/epubtrailer.py)
that: 1. unzips the epub; 2. searches the metadata for informations such
as: title, authors, publisher, publication date; 3. gathers all the
pictures in the book; 4. get a font if it’s embedded in the ePub; 5.
creates an animated gif out of those contents.

The scripts employs the [PIL
library](http://www.pythonware.com/products/pil/) to handle the images
(resizing, creating text, etc.) and
[images2gif](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/images2gif) to convert all the
images to an animated gif.

**Usage**

    python epubtrailer.py file-name.epub

Here’s a couple of examples.



![“A Neoist Research Project ” Epub
Trailer](imgs/trailer-A-Neoist-Research-Project.gif)


![“To Save Everything, Click Here” Epub
Trailer](imgs/trailer-B00B3M3X2G-EBOK.gif)





# Programma: Het ABC van digitaal publiceren – bijeenkomst 28 november {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
November 5, 2013 at 4:58 pm.

## Valt er nog iets te ontwerpen? Het ABC van digitaal publiceren\_

-   **Wat:** Bijeenkomst over e-publiceren over de kunst en cultuur
    sector
-   **Wanneer:** 28 november 2013 / 09.30 – 12.30 uur
-   **Waar:** Hogeschool van Amsterdam, Kohnstammzaal, Wibautstraat 2-4,
    Amsterdam

Het Instituut voor Netwerkcultuur nodigt u van harte uit om op 28
november van 9.30 – 12.30 deel te nemen aan de bijeenkomst over
e-publiceren voor de kunst- en cultuursector die in het kader van het
RAAK onderzoeksproject “Digital Publishing Toolkit” georganiseerd wordt.
Tijdens deze bijeenkomst zullen de eerste resultaten van dit project
gepresenteerd worden. Met aandacht voor vragen zoals: Hoe veranderen
nieuwe digitale vormen van publiceren de rol van de vormgever? Hoe
kunnen uitgeverijen in de kunst- en cultuursector zelf esthetische
interactieve e-publicaties ontwikkelen? Welke platformen kunnen
uitgevers gebruiken om digitaal te publiceren? Hoe verandert de
productieketen van uitgever tot vormgever?



# PROGRAMMA

**Moderator: Geert Lovink**

**09.00 – 09.30: Inloop, koffie/thee**

**09.30 – 09.45: Joost Kircz** ***Het ongebonden boek aan de ketting***
Er is iets aan de hand in de boekenbranche. Eeuwen lang hadden we
stevige boeken in alle formaten die goed in de hand lagen en als
vrienden ons leven verrijkten. Nu gaat het boek de wijde wereld in.
Schut het papier af als een streng Calvinistische opvoeding en ben vrij.
Maar welke vrijheid heeft dit ongebonden boek eigenlijk? Hierover hebben
wij op de Hogeschool van Amsterdam en met het Instituut voor
Netwerkcultuur al jaren ouderlijke zorgen. Wij organiseerden twee
congressen. Een in het Engels: “The Unbound Boek”, waarvan de
verhandelingen binnenkort bij AUP uitkomen, ach ach… op papier, maar ook
als saaie elektronische versie van dat papier. Een tweede conferentie
had de vrolijke titel “Boek uit de band”. En een project heet “Out of
Ink”, nu heeft de ongebonden adolescent zelfs de inktpot het raam uit
gegooid. Maar de vrije wereld van los fladderende zinnen, plaatjes,
films en liedjes wordt een ondoordringbaar woud, waar iedereen elkaar
roept , maar niemand elkaar meer kan verstaan. Dit project probeert na
te gaan welke soort talige-, beeldende- of audiocommunicatie tools nodig
heeft om zich vrij te bewegen tussen papier en scherm. In dit project
zoeken we uit wat we hebben, wat we willen overdragen en welke regels en
gereedschap daar voor nodig zijn.

**09.45 – 10.15: Florian Cramer** **10.15 – 10.30: Disucssie**
***E-Publishing voor kunst- en designuitgevers: uitdagingen 2013*** In
de huidige kunsten zijn elektronische publicaties belangrijker geworden
dan werd verwacht: Denk aan het e-flux journal en zijn impact op het
hedendaagse kunstdiscours of de filosofie van het Speculatieve Realisme
die door haar Open Access e-publicaties snel bekend is geworden. Maar
voor visueel georienteerde publicaties is de huidige e-publishing
technologie vaak nog lastig toe te passen. Aan de ene kant zijn de
verwachtingen van de technische mogelijkheden van het media vaak te
hoog, aan de andere kant denkt men vaak nog te beperkt in kaders van
simpele vertalingen van printproducten naar het scherm. Deze presentatie
zal inzicht geven in de voorlopige conclusies, uitdagingen en
oplossingen van het project Digital Publishing Toolkit.

**10.30 – 10.50: Showcase BISPublishers** ***Over lettertype gebruik,
spread layout, beeldgebruik en interactie*** Het deelproject
BISPublishers is Essense gestart met een kort onderzoek naar de wereld
van ‘digital publishing’. Inzichten hieruit zijn gebruikt als basis voor
het kiezen van ideale format, platform en device(s). Het digitale
traject van Auteur/Publisher naar de uiteindelijke lezer is complex
gebleken, doordat vele trajecten mogelijk zijn en er constant nieuwe bij
komen. Project BISPublishers werkt aan twee publicaties die zij tijdens
de bijeenkomst zullen presenteren. Het eerste -Think Like a Lawyer,
Don’t Act Like One- heeft als uitgangspunt om een vormgevingsgetrouw
e-book conversie te realiseren, waarbij het de opdracht was het
lettertype gebruik, de spread-layout en het beeldgebruik zoveel mogelijk
te behouden. Developer Sauli Warmerhoven bouwde een EPUB3 generator om
de pagina opmaak te automatiseren. De tweede publicatie -Sketching- is
het tekenleerboek voor (industrieel) ontwerpers, van de auteurs Koos
Eissen and Roselien Steur (TU Delft). De opdracht is het ontwikkelen van
een zeer visueel e-learning boek waarbij verschillende tekentechnieken
in beeld worden gebracht. Hiervoor worden onder andere de interactie
mogelijkheden onderzocht zoals een social elementen, layered pagina
opmaak, navigatie, video etc.

**11.10 – 11.30: Showcase Valiz** ***Context Without Walls – genereren
van een serie ontworpen ePubs*** Valiz, Meeus Ontwerpt en PUNTPIXEL
richt zich op het creeeren van een digitale versie van twee edities van
de nieuwe serie van Valiz genaamd: Context Without Walls. De publicaties
in deze serie zijn gericht op kunstenaars van over de hele wereld. De
boeken zijn meertalig en bevatten zowel essays, als beelden. De print
versies van Context Without Walls zijn gemaakt door Meeus Ontwerpt en
bevatten veel design en conversie uitdagingen. Sommige van deze
problemen bestaan uit het werken met visuele essays, referenties in de
marges van de pagina en (voet)noten. Zowel rekening houdend met de
technische mogelijkheden en de vragen van het ontwerp, hebben ze
oplossingen gezocht voor deze problemen die ontstaan bij het omzetten
van een papieren boek in een e-book. Dit heeft geleid tot de beslissing
om een ‘ eenvoudige ‘ en een ‘ ingewikkelde ‘ digitale versie van het e
– boek te maken. In de presentatie zullen Valiz en PUNTPIXEL het
concrete resultaat van het werk tot nu toe laten zien, gericht op de
EPUB-generator ontwikkeld door PUNTPIXEL. Daarnaast zullen de keuzes (en
de redenering achter hen) tot nog toe besproken worden.

**11.30 – 11.50: Showcase nai010 uitgevers** ***Verzamelen Highlights***
De groep van nai010 Publishers, Medamo en PUNTPIXEL ontwikkelt een
digitale versie van de Stedelijk Museum Highlights Catalogus. In plaats
van het creëren van een 1:1 ebook kopie van de catalogus, ontwikkelen ze
een digitaal distributieplatform via een (mobiele) web-applicatie. Deze
geeft de gebruikers de mogelijkheid om hun persoonlijke hoogtepunten uit
de Stedelijk collectie te vinden, filteren, zoeken, bekijken en
verzamelen tijdens een bezoek. Deze serie hoogtepunten wordt vervolgens
gebruikt om een persoonlijke EPUB catalogus van de collectie samen te
stellen en te genereren en kan worden gedownload voor offline bekijken
met behulp van dezelfde online web toepassing. Deze elektronische versie
van de collectie catalogus is gratis wanneer tien of minder kunstwerken
worden verzameld. In de presentatie zal de algemene lay-out van de
applicatie besp worden en daarnaast de commerciële rol van nai010
bespreken als de uitgever, content of service provider.

**11.50 – 12.10: Showcase Institute of Network Cultures** ***One
thousand and One workflows*** INC, Silvio Lorusso and Michael Murtaugh
houden zich bezig met workflows voor digitale publicaties die verder
gaan dan het online zetten van een PDF. Ze willen de creatieve spanning
verkennen tussen de strikte beperkingen en bijzonderheden van ePub als
een output formaat en de diversiteit van de mogelijke instrumenten en
methoden die kunnen worden gebruikt om deze te produceren. Specifieke
uitdagingen zijn te vinden in het werken met verschillende input-en
output -formaten (zoals Word-documenten, video- materiaal aan de ene
kant, gedrukte boeken, digitale edities, blogs ed aan de andere kant),
met een min of meer gestandaardiseerde workflow als gewenste uitkomst.
Uitgaande van het materiaal van het Instituut voor Netwerkcultuur
project ‘Unlike Us’ wordt, een herdefiniering van de workflow en de
daaruit voortvloeiende resultaten onderzocht werkende met een database
en Markdown tekstbestanden. Binnen dit project wordt gebruik gemaakt van
een gevarieerde toolbox van free software tools afkomstig uit
verschillende praktijken (grafische vormgeving, informatica, taalkunde,
tekstredactie, bloggen, bibliotheek wetenschappen, statistiek, reverse
engineering).

**12.10 – 12.30: Discussie en afsluiting**



# Book review. The end of ebooks. 20 visionaries on the future of digital reading. {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
October 31, 2013 at 3:11 pm.

![Het einde van ebooks](imgs/eindeebooks_big.jpg) *(This book is
published by publisher Eburon in Dutch. Original Title: ‘Het einde van
ebooks. 20 visionairs over de toekomst van digitaal lezen)*

The title indicates the intention of the book. To make a prediction of
the development of ebooks by looking at what comes beyond. It’s an
interesting play of thought, but unfortunately the idea doesn’t always
come to it’s full potential as the articles circle around similar
predictions that have been around for a while. They focus mainly on the
technical potential of ebooks and the changing position of the author,
reader and publisher that follow. Some of the authors also critically
address the (technical) limitations that detain these visions of the
future to become true, but a perspective on what we want this future to
look like seems to be missing.



#### Predictions

Many of the authors describe the Ebooks of the future as explosions of
video and sound, where people interact with the book, each-other, and
the author, allowing ‘social reading’ and personal publications. Ebooks
will thus become multimedia publications that should not be seen as
book, website, game, video or any other kind of document, but as a
hybrid in which interactivity is key. Readers can not only change the
size of the text, or add comments and highlights, but also exchange
reading habits and experiences with their fellow readers. This social
reading can already be seen in services like
[Readmill](https://readmill.com), [Goodreads](http://www.goodreads.com)
and [Bookshout!](http://www.bookshout.com).

As Bob van Duuren describes in his article “Uitdaging voor de
boekenvakker: innoveren en afscheid nemen” this Social Reading process
can also give the authors the opportunity to include user feedback into
their writing process. (Making you wonder to what extend authors should
start writing for the sake of their readers). But the position of the
author will not only change in this respect. As Erwin Blom points out in
“Boekenwereld, geef de koper wat hij wil, anders gaat hij het halen” new
platforms like iBooks from Apple make it easy for ‘everyone’ to create
their own ebook and distribute it to their readers directly. This ease
of publishing is emphasized by the absence of printing costs, and other
free platforms like Abulafia that allow you to create an ePub and
distribute it with ease. As a result everyone can publish ebooks
endlessly resulting in an overload of publications instead of scarcity
that is characteristic of printed books.

Publishers, who normally gate keep what is being published and how it is
being published, don’t have a defined role in this user driven
publishing network anymore as Dr. Willem de Laat describes in his
article “Memo 3: Het einde van het ebook?”. Moreover, big players, like
Apple, Amazon and Google seem to push publishers even further from their
position as they develop their own formats, readers and apps to connect
as many readers to their platforms, which results in private ecosystems.
This is also the case for smaller initiatives or services like Readmill.
To make use of the social layer of the book, you are bound to their
platform.

The shift in the position of the publishers also leeds to questions
about business models. How can you ensure any income from your
publications when everyone can publish, when authors can skip the step
of the publisher and distribute the books themselves, when readers can
download the book you so carefully produced on any of the torrent sites
and copy them endlessly? More than ones the connection to the music
industry and the iTunes and Spotify business model are made. From this
perspective people no longer pay for the ebooks themselves, but for the
service and ease of use. From this perspective it becomes more important
to create a user-friendly platform with a complete collection for a
reasonable price. But these new business models are not without problems
as Willem Mastenbroek Jr. in “De toekomst van het ebook Nieuwe hoop of
totale ondergang?” describes. The consumption of ebooks is not
comparable to the consumption of single mp3 files – how many pages can
you read during one song? – leading to the question when such a service
will be profitable.

### Move beyond predictions?

Overall most of the articles stay rather close to these predictions and
hesitations. It is as if we are still blinded by the seemingly endless
possibilities of the ebook that we are unable to look beyond them or
take a clear stance on where this development should lead. It confirms
the goal of the digital publishing toolkit project. To look really
closely at the development of ebooks from a designers perspective, and
see the practicalities of the technical potential, and use these to
reflect on a possible future for ebooks.

From this perspective it becomes even more clear how critical we should
be of the position of platforms like Amazon, Google, and Apple within
the publishing world. It is not only that they are overthrowing the
strong position of publishers within the publishing chain, they also
enforce certain formats that limit, or at least direct the possibilities
of design. In the case of Apple this is even more pressing as you can
only sell your ‘beautifully designed’ iBooks within Apples stores. Gonny
der Zwaag makes a similar assumption: “It creates tremendous need for
simple tools to make magazines and books yourself. Who offers the best
tools and becomes market leader, can earn a lot by taking a percentage
of the sales.” Unfortunately she doesn’t address the problems that come
with having a market leader without having any real alternatives.

Peter de Ruiter in his article “Binnenkort op uw tablet: de killer
foto-app” addresses these problems and he wonders to what extend we
should conform to Apple’s ecosystem and give the company 30 percent of
our revenue. He looks at the development of ebooks from a photographers
perspective and notices that the tools to develop beautiful photography
books, outside of the Apple ecosystem, are missing. He describes the
technical limitations of creating a simple product as a photo ebook –
not a photo app, which is very expensive to develop. In this way he
makes clear that even though ebooks *can* be explosions of multimedia,
on a practical level this doesn’t always add up. He makes a clear plead
for developers to create an easy to use tool for this, thus being fully
aware of the problematic position the iBooks format has.

#### Conclusions

Essentially the book thus gives a clear overview of all the different
perspectives, arguments, pro’s and con’s of digital publishing. But is
it enough to simply predict these changes by looking at what is
happening right now, and not envision what you would like this future to
look like? Will we allow platforms like Apple, Amazon and Google to
define the field of digital publishing, and possibly overthrowing the
role of publishers, or do we create parallel platforms that allow for
experiments in content, revenue models, and most importantly in the case
of the digital publishing toolkit project: design?



# Valt er nog iets te ontwerpen? Het ABC van digitaal publiceren {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [margreet
riphagen](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/arjen/ "Posts by margreet riphagen"),
October 16, 2013 at 12:12 pm.

![](imgs/flyer_a5_final_web-02.jpg)

![](imgs/flyer_a5_final_web-01.jpg)

**Het lectoraat voor Netwerkcultuur presenteert het ABC van digitaal
publiceren op donderdag 28 november 2013 van 09.30 tot 12.30 in het
Kohnstammhuis (Kohnstammzaal, 9e verdieping). Wees allen welkom. [Meld
je alsjeblieft wel even
aan](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/17VkX64WM8LRrh7r4y4nCc6xKTqYcMGrH2LjrnYMAz-s/edit).**



# On the publication of Think Like a Lawyer, Don’t Act Like One {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [sauli](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/sauli-2/ "Posts by sauli"),
October 16, 2013 at 11:19 am.

Our subgroup, consisting of BIS publishers, Essense, and Sauli
Warmenhoven set out to create a ePub version of the BIS publication of
*Think Like a Lawyer, Don’t Act Like One*. This publication has a
relatively straightforward layout, with its 75 lessons generally being
displayed in similar fashion, namely the text of a lesson on one page,
and on the facing page a full-bleed image.

![page from Think Like a Lawyer, Don't Act Like
One](imgs/2013-10-16-11.15.23.png) ![page from Think Like a Lawyer,
Don't Act Like One](imgs/2013-10-16-11.15.29.png)

We felt that this publication was an excellent opportunity to try our
hand at a fixed layout epub. Though fixed layout support is in its
infancy, as there is no common support for it, fixed layouts are
possible on modern tablets, such as the iPad and recent kindles, we
thought it would be worthwile to be ambitious in this regard. In the end
the choice was made to create a second version with a simpler layout, to
facilitate the reading of the publication on older devices.

In order to generate the 160 or so pages of the publication, we
developed a simple tool that acted as a CMS of sorts. The tool allows
for the creation of page spreads, and the entering of associated texts
and background-images. When all content is entered, an epub is generated
on the basis of predetermined templates. This generated file then has to
be checked for errors, and was in this case disassembled so that the
page spreads that do not follow standard layout could be done by hand.
All in all even with the use of the tool it still turned out to be a
significant workload, that could, in the future, only in part be
lightened by a more efficient workflow.

[link to the code on
github](https://github.com/DigitalPublishingToolkit/epub_generator)



# The revolution of digital publishing is taking place right now {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
October 15, 2013 at 1:44 pm.

![](imgs/bam-bijschrift-cmyk-NL.jpg)

## An interview with Geert Lovink by Jorinde Seijdel (in Dutch)

[The revolution of digital publishing is taking place right
now](http://bamart.be/files/BKveldanalyse_SeijdelLovink.pdf) (PDF) About
the current practice and the future of digital publishing for the arts
and cultural sector. What are the possibilities and challenges and what
are the pitfalls?

**Inleiding** Bij de ingrijpende bezuinigingsmaatregelen voor kunst en
cultuur in Nederland, die in 2013 in werking zijn gesteld, werd onder
meer bepaald dat aan kunst- en cultuurtijdschriften geen subsidie meer
kan worden verleend. Dit soort publicaties, met haar vermeende dure
productiemodellen en elitair kritische houding, moet net als andere
cultuuruitingen gestuurd gaan worden door de markt, aldus het
neoliberale adagium van de dominante Nederlandse politiek. Als reactie
hierop werden prompt conferenties en debatten georganiseerd over het in
zijn bestaan bedreigde kunsttijdschrift en de vraag hoe verder. Het zal
niet verbazen dat alles er daarbij op wees dat de toekomst van het
publiceren over kunst en cultuur online en digitaal is. Dit stelde de
meeste ‘old-school’ kunstredacties, auteurs, uitgevers en lezers echter
nauwelijks gerust, gezien de nieuwe inhoudelijke, organisatorische en
financiële vragen die erdoor worden opgeroepen.

Echter, de ‘crisis‘ van het kunst- en cultuurtijdschrift wordt
natuurlijk niet alleen veroorzaakt door het wegvallen van subsidies en
maatschappelijke support, maar vooral door de immer toenemende druk van
de geglobaliseerde digitale cultuur. De bezuinigingen leiden er in
Nederland vooral toe dat de digitalisering van het publiceren en
uitgeven van kunst en cultuur niet langer meer uit de weg kan worden
gegaan. Dit interview met Geert Lovink, mediatheoreticus en ‘founding
director’ van het Instituut voor Netwerkcultuur (INC) in Amsterdam (Een
onderzoekscentrum en lectoraat van de Hogeschool van Amsterdam (HVA) en
de Universiteit van Amsterdam (UVA) Zie:
[networkcultures.org](http://networkcultures.org)), gaat over de huidige
praktijk en de toekomst van publiceren en uitgeven over kunst en
cultuur. Wat zijn de uitdagingen en mogelijkheden en wat de valkuilen?
Vanuit een beschouwing van ontwikkelingen in de mediacultuur en digitaal
publiceren in het algemeen wordt vervolgens ingezoomd op de kunst- en
cultuurpublicatie.



**Jorinde Seijdel (JS)** Het INC onderzoekt met langlopende projecten
als Out of Ink en Digital Publishing Toolkit de gevolgen van de
digitalisering voor het publiceren en uitgeven, met speciale aandacht
voor de kunst- en cultuursector. Waarom staat dit onderwerp zo hoog op
jullie agenda?

**Geert Lovink (GL)** Het INC onderzoekt digitaal publiceren door het
zelf in de praktijk te brengen. Onze publicaties zijn te lezen op het
web, als EPUB te downloaden op je telefoon en te bestellen als boek via
Print on Demand. Zeker de helft drukken we zelf en geven we gratis weg.
Zo kunnen we diverse nieuwe platforms en publicatiemodellen uitproberen
en de juridische, technische en sociale standaarden bevragen die
momenteel onderdeel zijn van issues als intellectueel eigendom,
wetenschappelijke en artistieke communicatie of noties van auteurschap.
En zo kunnen we kennis delen en anderen ten voorbeeld zijn. Het veld van
digitaal uitgeven en publiceren is juist nu enorm aan het groeien. De
revolutie van digitaal uitgeven vindt nu plaats! Wij vinden het dus
belangrijk dat wij ons hierin mengen als schrijvers, kunstenaars en
ontwerpers en ons niet als consumenten en hekkensluiters opstellen.
Computers worden steeds kleiner en handzamer en internetverbindingen
sneller. We zijn op een punt in de geschiedenis beland waarop het heel
makkelijk is om grote bestanden te downloaden en uit te wisselen als het
gaat om tekst, beelden, boeken en tijdschriften. Het gangbaar worden van
het vrije en open e-boekformaat EPUB speelt hierin ook een rol. Door
EPUB kunnen mensen nu ook teksten lezen op hun telefoon (EPUB is
ontworpen voor ‘reflowable’ content. Bij ‘reflowable’ content kan de
tekst van de boeken voor elke e-reader geoptimaliseerd worden. Zie ook:
[en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison\_of\_e-book\_formats](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_e-book_formats)).

**JS** Wat vind je in dit kader van het Google Books project, waarin
Google ernaar streeft om alle boeken en alle kennis van de wereld te
scannen, digitaliseren en doorzoekbaar te maken (zie:
[books.google.com](http://books.google.com))

**GL** Het Google Books project is een soort kristallisatiepunt van alle
mogelijkheden en problemen die er bij dergelijke ondernemingen komen
kijken. En het is een echte hoofdbreker gebleken voor de bazen van
Google. Er is een mooie BBC-documentaire gemaakt over de geschiedenis
ervan, ‘Google and the World Brain’, die heel goed laat zien waar het in
de volgende fase over gaat en hoe zulke projecten kunnen vastlopen (Ben
Lewis, ‘Google and the World Brain’, 2010. Zie ook:
[www.worldbrainthefilm.com)](http://www.worldbrainthefilm.com%29). Niet
alleen door de copyrightproblemen, maar ook door de gigantische en
encyclopedische opgave om alle kennis van de wereld te willen
digitaliseren om er vervolgens zelf rijk van te worden. We worden
allemaal uitgedaagd om deel te nemen aan dergelijke mammoetprojecten.
Mensen kunnen nu op hun telefoon of laptop enorme bibliotheken bij zich
dragen, dus deze ontwikkeling zal alleen maar verder toenemen. De
kernvraag is hoe je het beste in deze bestanden kunt zoeken. Dat moet
onderwezen worden op scholen en daar moet zo snel mogelijk mee worden
begonnen. Het kunnen formuleren van een goeie vraag, dat is de kwestie.
Technologie leert je dat niet, dat kan alleen goed onderwijs doen.
Daarom wordt er relatief ook niet zoveel bezuinigd op onderwijs en
onderzoek. Kennis mag dan wel gedemocratiseerd zijn, maar wat kun je
ermee? Als je de goede vraag hebt, en weet wat je moet bestuderen, pas
dan kan je al die online bibliotheken en archieven waar je de toegang
toe hebt op een productieve manier gebruiken.

**JS** In die documentaire kwamen ook een aantal pregnante voorbeelden
in beeld van boeken die helemaal verkreukeld of onleesbaar gescand en
gedigitaliseerd werden. Iets wat natuurlijk de woede opwekt van de
schrijvers ervan, die dit ervaren als beschadiging van hun intellectueel
eigendom. En het ging ook over het feit dat Google zou kunnen
controleren wat je leest, waar je leest, wanneer en hoe lang je leest.
Wat betekent iets als Google Books voor onze notie van privacy?

**GL** Deze eigendoms- en privacykwesties zijn cruciaal en komen
tegenwoordig in elke context voor, ook in onderwijs, gezondheidszorg,
werk, noem maar op. Het gaat om de fundamentele en lastige vraag: in
hoeverre ben ik de eigenaar van wat ik doe en produceer in de digitale
sfeer? Het gaat echt om meer dan alleen copyright. Als je kijkt naar hoe
er geld wordt verdiend met sociale media, dan snap je wel dat het ook
bij het digitale lezen gaat om het uitmelken van de
aanbevelingseconomie. ‘Ik lees Orwell dus ben ik ook geïnteresseerd in
Huxley, en zou ik zijn boeken misschien ook wel moeten kopen.’ Ook
krijgen aantekeningen maken in een digitaal boek en commentaar leveren
met elkaar straks een andere status.

**JS** Wat verstaan jullie eigenlijk precies onder digitaal publiceren?
Hebben we het dan zowel over e-boeken, iPads, digitale webmagzines als
Print on Demand, of is een digitale publicatie in jullie visie
specifieker?

**GL** Het gaat ons niet zozeer om de verschillende platforms en
technologieën zoals de Kindle van Amazon of iBooks van Apple, maar om
het onderzoeken en hoog houden van standaards die in de boekcultuur door
de eeuwen heen zijn ontwikkeld. Het gaat over wat een goed geredigeerde
tekst is, wat leesbare, gebruiksvriendelijke typografie is. Het gaat ook
om de aandacht die we kunnen geven aan een tekst. Hoe lezen we, hoe
positioneren we beeld en woord? We weten al heel lang dat het boek
multimediaal gaat worden, maar hoe gaat dat precies? Wat is het belang
van de illustratie en de plaats van voetnoten in een tijd dat je alles
kunt illustreren met video en ieder woord kan worden uitgelegd via een
link naar Wikipedia? De kennis die hierover al is opgedaan, wordt op dit
moment omgezet naar digitale omgevingen, maar wat vinden wij daarvan?
Welke nieuwe elementen kunnen we eraan toevoegen zonder de gehele
schriftcultuur overboord te zetten? Welke nieuwe mogelijkheden zijn er
om verwijzingen te maken? Wanneer is een verwijzing productief, wanneer
niet? Een voorbeeld: er wordt nu vaak gedacht dat we bij digitaal lezen
voortdurend worden afgeleid en dat het alleen maar gaat om ‘distributed
attention’. Maar vroeger bestond de vraag hoe mensen hun aandacht bij
het boek of de tekst kunnen houden ook al. De Duitse mediawetenschapster
Petra Loeffler heeft hier interessant onderzoek naar gedaan (Zie voor
informatie over haar onderzoek:
[www.uni-weimar.de/cms/?id=22734)](http://www.uni-weimar.de/cms/?id=22734%29).
Vandaag de dag is het door de ons omringende communicatieprogramma’s
echter wel moeilijker om die concentratie op te brengen. Dus de
technieken die ons moeten helpen om ons te concentreren moeten
verfijnder worden. Op veel e-readers kun je instellen of je afgeleid
wilt worden door sociale media of niet. Er wordt dus heel veel
teruggeworpen naar de individuele gebruiker: jij moet het zelf aangeven.
Wil je toegang tot Facebook, meer of minder licht, een andere letter?
Het gaat om digitale geletterdheid, iets wat we allemaal individueel
moeten uitvinden en leren (en wat in Nederland ongelukkigerwijs
‘mediawijsheid’ is genoemd). Wat wij in ons onderzoek kunnen doen is
deze dingen systematisch uitzoeken: hoe zit het nu met dit platform? En
waar loop je als vormgever nou tegenaan bij dit of dat format?

**JS** Kunstpublicaties zijn relatief marginaal en kwetsbaar in de
boekenmarkt. Beschouw je het kunst- en cultuurtijdschrift als een aparte
categorie, met eigen organisatorische, financiële en inhoudelijke vragen
ten aanzien van digitaal publiceren?

**GL** Op dit moment nog niet per se. Ik denk wel dat er vanuit de
kunsten veel behoefte is om het gesproken woord en het bewegende beeld
dichter bij elkaar te brengen. Op dat gebied zal er nog heel wat gaan
worden geëxperimenteerd. Misschien zal zich een nieuw genre
kunstpublicatie ontvouwen, als een opvolging van het foto-essay of de
essayachtige documentaire. Denk aan de korte YouTube- en
Wikipedia-filmpjes, die in een paar seconden of in een paar minuten een
complex probleem, een begrip, een geschiedenis uitleggen. Op dit gebied
staat ons nog heel wat te wachten. En het is onze taak om al die
experimenten, expertises en technologieën op een heel poëtische en
verleidelijke, maar toch dwingende manier samen te brengen.
Kunstpublicaties zouden meer vrijheid moeten claimen en zich moeten
mengen in het experimenteerveld. Waarom zijn veel kunstenaars zo
conservatief, stellen ze geen vragen en houden zich afzijdig als het
gaat om de media-architectuur van de toekomst? Kunsttijdschriften moeten
net als in het interbellum weer een avant-garde positie innemen. Toen
ging het om typografie, nu gaat het om technische formats.

**JS** In Nederland lijkt er momenteel sprake van een crisis van het
gedrukte kunst- en cultuurtijdschrift. Dit komt deels doordat de
subsidies acuut zijn weggevallen. Maar is het sowieso nog van deze tijd
om op de traditionele wijze, zowel in technische als in inhoudelijke
zin, over kunst en cultuur te publiceren? Is ook niet aan de orde dat
een gedrukt kunsttijdschrift een ouderwetse expertcultuur reflecteert en
een omgang met beeld en tekst die onder druk staan van de op
participatie en interactie gerichte digitale cultuur? Zijn
kunsttijdschriften hierdoor niet gedwongen om hun werkwijze en positie
te herzien?

**GL** Ja zeker. In de kunst- en cultuurwereld gaat het inderdaad nog
erg om een gesloten expertcultuur. Het is niet gewenst dat anderen zich
daarin mengen, want het gaat er uiteindelijk om wat beleidsmakers en
verzamelaars vinden. Men is behoorlijk elitair en bang voor de mening
van buiten. Ik denk zelf dat het creëren van urgentie één van de
grootste uitdagingen voor een hedendaagse redactie en zeker ook voor een
kunstredactie is. Die urgentie kan niet meer voortkomen uit het geven
van informatie, want informatie kunnen we inmiddels overal vinden, en
informatievoorziening doen andere, snellere (sociale) media veel beter.
Dan kom je toch uit bij het publiceren van achtergrondverhalen en debat.
Dus de tijdschriften zouden zich meer moeten richten op de context. Voor
mij is een voorbeeld op het gebied van cultuur, dat onder de nieuwe
voorwaarden van publiceren tot stand komt, de online Los Angeles Review
of Books ([lareviewofbooks.org](http://lareviewofbooks.org)). Ook kan je
denken aan een kunst- en theorievariant van Hacker News
([news.ycombinator.com/news](http://news.ycombinator.com/news)). E-Flux
Journal is dat nu een beetje maar hun aanpak is erg gedateerd, aangezien
zij geen discussie- en aanbevelingscomponent hebben
([www.e-flux.com/journals/](http://www.e-flux.com/journals/)).

**JS** In de digitale cultuur kan inderdaad iedereen consument én
producent zijn en zijn/haar zegje doen. Iedereen kan beelden en teksten
publiceren, al is het maar in de vorm van Tweets. Is dat de affirmatieve
digitale cultuur van ‘liken’ en ‘trashen’? Hoe moeten
publicatieplatforms over kunst en de ‘serieuze’ kunst- en cultuurkritiek
zich hiertoe verhouden?

**GL** Ik zie juist het belang van interactief en online discussiëren en
daar kunnen dergelijke applicaties iets aan bijdragen. Ik denk dat er
nog veel te winnen valt door het verder ontwikkelen, niet alleen van een
soort ‘netiquette’, maar van een geavanceerde en kritische
experimenteercultuur. De angst voor populaire cultuur is onterecht en al
decennia geleden bekritiseerd. Door eraan vast te houden ontwijk je je
verantwoordelijkheid. Hoe kunnen we met elkaar van mening verschillen en
discussiëren? Het gaat niet alleen om ‘trash-cultuur’. Op populistische
websites als geenstijl.nl is het degraderen van elkaar echt uit de hand
gelopen en daar valt een hoop van te leren. Het gaat ook om het
ontwikkelen van nieuwe technische en redactionele vaardigheden.
Bijvoorbeeld om goed te kunnen omgaan met filters en om vaardigheden te
kunnen toepassen waarmee je op een snellere manier inhoud kunt
samenvatten en op een snellere manier kunt overzien en bevatten wat je
voor je hebt. Vroeger waren we veel meer afhankelijk van de vaardigheden
van professionele critici, schrijvers, journalisten, van ‘gatekeepers’,
om zicht te krijgen op de algemene sfeer in de maatschappij. Nu wordt
dat steeds meer aan onszelf overgelaten. Ik zie dit als uitdaging en
niet alleen als vervlakking.

**JS** Wordt er op kunstacademies en hun ontwerpafdelingen wel genoeg
aandacht besteed aan nieuwe vormen van ontwerpen en publiceren in een
culturele context?

**GL** Niet genoeg. De ontwerpafdelingen op kunstacademies houden zich
bezig met websites vormgeven, maar nog zelden met e-boeken en
e-publiceren. De trend blijft het maken van leuke boekjes van papier.
Door de aarzeling aan de kant van kunstenaars en ontwerpers mist de
digitale boekenbranche nog een artistieke en experimentele component.
Het is ofwel vrij commercieel, of vrij technisch. Juist de kunstzinnige
kant ervan blijft nog onderbelicht. Maar er zijn ook andere oorzaken: Je
zou kunnen denken dat er veel werk aan de winkel is voor een nieuwe
generatie ontwerpers, maar dit is op dit moment niet het geval omdat
overal gebruikgemaakt wordt van standaard templates. Zolang mensen
blijven geloven in gecentraliseerde platforms (veelal in Amerikaanse
handen) zal er weinig gebeuren.

**JS** Bij de debatten rond de toekomst van het kunst- en
cultuurtijdschrift is een steeds terugkerende vraag: “Wat is dan het
verdienmodel als we online gaan of een e-boek worden?”

**GL** We zien in de boeken- en uitgeefbranche het verval van het
traditionele verdien- en productiemodel, waarin een uitgever een
materieel object, een boek of tijdschrift, fabriceert, distribueert en
verkoopt op vaste fysieke plekken en volgens vaste afspraken, terwijl de
online verdienmogelijkheden zich nog niet volledig hebben bewezen. In de
nieuwe situatie wordt de gebruiker/consument veel bepalender bij wat hij
wanneer en waar wil kopen en voor welke prijs. Vandaag was wel het goede
nieuws op de radio dat dankzij streaming-diensten als Spotify de
muziekindustrie voor het eerst in tien jaar weer winst maakt – al maakt
Spotify dan zelf nog geen winst. Dit zou de boekenmarkt ook kunnen
overkomen, dat het oude en nieuwe elkaar gaan versterken. We kunnen er
ook van uitgaan dat er het een en ander gaat gebeuren zodra er een
werkende inter-netvaluta is (zoals Bitcoin
([nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bitcoin](http://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bitcoin))
) en betalingen van kleine bedragen automatisch verlopen. Crowdfunding
kan ook een rol gaan spelen bij het schrijven van boeken die dan
vervolgens, zodra ze af zijn, gratis kunnen worden verspreid.

**JS** Het Spotify-model bestaat eigenlijk uit tijdelijk weggeven van
inhoud om dan vervolgens voor het gebruik te laten betalen. Zie jij iets
dergelijks ook voor je in het geval van kunstpublicaties? Deze sector is
doorgaans niet gewend in termen van winst te denken, omdat er altijd
relatief veel gesubsidieerd werd – de publicatie en/of de auteur. Nu dat
wegvalt moet men wel over alternatieven nadenken …

**GL** Absoluut. Er zijn nog economische beperkingen en daarom ook veel
teleurstellingen. Men heeft niet goed opgelet en niet op tijd
maatregelen genomen om op doordachte wijze te kunnen aansluiten bij het
digitale domein. Er is in principe genoeg ruimte voor nieuwe
verdienmodellen. Om ze te ontdekken en te kunnen gebruiken, zullen
makers echter wel op een andere manier moeten gaan werken. En er zal
bijvoorbeeld een veel duidelijkere politieke lobby op gang moeten komen
om kunstenaars en vormgevers een vaste plaats te geven binnen bedrijven
en instellingen. Het idee van de autonome kunstenaar die het liefst
alleen gelaten wil worden om zijn/haar ding te doen, maar daar wel voor
betaald wil worden door de gemeenschap, moet worden losgelaten. Het
blijft nog zoeken en experimenteren, vooral binnen de meer kritische en
onafhankelijke cultuur. Bij ons instituut zijn we nu een project
begonnen, Moneylab, dat zich met alternatieve verdienmodellen
bezighoudt: mobiele betalingen, crowdfunding, Bitcoin en andere
internetvaluta zullen hierin centraal staan. Het gaat ook over hoe
nieuwe ‘peer-to-peer’ mobiele betalingssystemen de positie van bestaande
banken en het geldmonopolie van de staat ondergraven.

**JS** Het afgelopen decennium was er op internet ook een bepaalde
cultuur waarin werd gepropageerd dat alle online content, beelden,
muziek, films, software, gratis te downloaden zou moeten zijn. Ik las
een uitspraak van jou waarin je stelt dat deze ‘ideology of the free’
funest is voor professionele makers. Je zegt: “What we instead need is
an alternative economy, one in which artists and creative producers are
financially rewarded directly, without ‘middle men’, for instance
through micro-payments
(blog.p2pfoundation.net/geert-lovink-on-free-culture-and-artists-revenues/2010/06/07).”

**GL** Inderdaad. En het online ‘peer-to-peer’ betalen van kleine
bedragen wordt ook steeds makkelijker. Ik denk dat we ons over een
tijdje ook helemaal niet meer kunnen voorstellen dat eens alles gratis
was, of dat men vond dat het dat zou moeten zijn. Die gratiscultuur
lijkt heel aantrekkelijk, maar is juist heel destructief. ‘Free culture’
is ook iets heel anders dan ‘open source’. Het laatste betekent vrije
toegang tot de broncodes, en dat is van groot belang om kennis met
elkaar te kunnen delen en dingen te kunnen ontwikkelen, te kunnen maken.
Met elkaar informatie kunnen delen is een recht.

**JS** Kun je iets vertellen over de Digital Publishing Toolkit, waaraan
jullie nu werken? Op de website staat dat veel uitgevers in de kunst- en
cultuursector onbekend zijn met de nieuwste ontwikkelingen op het gebied
van digitaal publiceren en uitgeven: “They do not have the knowledge,
resources and capacities to develop new methods of digital publishing
and participate in the digital market. Moreover, the art and culture
books have an extra challenge, because form and content are deeply
intertwined
([networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/aboutus](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/aboutus)).”

**GL** De Digital Publishing Toolkit is toegepast onderzoek dat wij hier
op de Hogeschool van Amsterdam doen. We werken er nu hard aan en willen
het pakket volgend jaar beschikbaar stellen. De onderzoeksvraag is op de
site als volgt geformuleerd: “In what way can a platform be created with
new tools for open source-publishing, by which publishers in the art-
and cultural sector can produce interactive e-publications by
themselves?” We proberen ervaring met alle mogelijke platforms bij
elkaar te brengen, zodat uitgevers en ontwerpers die graag willen
beginnen met digitaal publiceren daarvan kunnen leren. PDF, EPUB, web
apps, e-readers en tablets, smartphones, enz. Windows komt met nieuwe
standaarden en er is ook een nieuwe open source standaard van Ubuntu.
Het gebied dijt steeds verder uit. Potentiële makers zien door al die
verschillende platformen en technologieën door de bomen het bos niet
meer. De toolkit is dus bedoeld om ontwikkelaars, ontwerpers,
kunstenaars en uitgevers die zelf digitaal willen gaan publiceren te
helpen de juiste keuzes te maken. Uiteindelijk zal iedereen de
gereedschappen kunnen kopiëren, aanpassen en distribueren. BIS
Publishers, Valiz, nai010 Uitgevers doen mee aan de kant van de
Nederlandse kunstuitgevers. De participanten werken in vijf deelgroepen
aan elektronische publicaties die als voorbeeldprojecten dienen. We
zullen eind 2014 een handleiding presenteren voor hoe je als
uitgever/producent met de veelheid aan platformen en mogelijkheden om
kunt gaan.

**JS** De toolkit is dus zowel bedoeld voor professionele
kunstuitgeverijen als voor onafhankelijke ‘self publishing’ door
schrijvers, vormgevers of kunstenaars?

**GL** Ja, de professionele uitgeverijen hebben wat dit betreft geen
voorsprong op een kunstenaar of schrijver bijvoorbeeld, die
onafhankelijk zelf een publicatie produceert. Ze kunnen over dezelfde
technologie en programmatuur beschikken. Bij de Digital Publishing
Toolkit gaat het echter vooral om de samenwerking tussen uitgevers en
ontwerpers. Sommigen denken dat alles in het productieproces van
digitaal publiceren al is geautomatiseerd, maar op dit moment is het
handmatige aanpassen, het exporteren, coderen en controleren nog heel
erg belangrijk. En de juiste keuzes maken dus, aangaande platform,
format, opmaaktaal en software. Als je nu bijvoorbeeld het formaat EPUB
niet serieus neemt, dan vergeet je wel dat het momenteel dé standaard is
op alle smart-phones. En er wordt meer en meer gelezen via de
smartphone. Dus als je EPUB aan je voorbij laat gaan dan sluit je al die
smartphone-gebruikers uit.

**JS** Beschouw je de Digital Publishing Toolkit als een neutrale set
gereedschappen of moet er ook een democratiserende werking van uitgaan?
Er zijn in de uitgeef- en boekenwereld en in de e-culture business
immers dwingende monopolies en machtsverhoudingen. Heb jij als
mediatheoreticus met een activistische achtergrond ook een kritische
inzet?

**GL** Wij zijn ons heel erg bewust van de grote, maatschappelijke en
commerciële belangen die werkzaam zijn en dat die uiteindelijk zullen
bepalen welke standaard algemeen gebruikt gaat worden. Met de Digital
Publishing Toolkit willen we de kunstuitgeverijen en makers vooral
helpen om mee te blijven spelen, en uiteindelijk: om te overleven. Ik
vind dat ontwerpers aan de bak moeten en dat zij bovenop de
technologische ontwikkelingen moeten zitten. De vormgeving, de esthetiek
en de esthetische ervaring van het boek is heel belangrijk. Als de
artistieke makers afhaken dan leidt dat de facto tot verarming, die nog
veel verder zal rijken dan alleen de visuele, sensuele ervaring van het
boek. Vormgevers moeten actief betrokken zijn en zichzelf zien als
drivers van deze ontwikkelingen en niet als slachtoffer.

**JS** Dit is toch een heel geëngageerde inzet, een oproep tot
participatie?

**GL** Ja, maar het gaat niet per se om een bevrijdende ervaring van de
maker of de lezer. Want ik denk dat we daar al heel ver in zijn. Het is
nu juist het gevaar dat we eindigen met een heel beperkte hoeveelheid
van dominante standaarden, die leidt tot een verarming van het kunst- en
cultuurboek, van haar diversiteit, en uiteindelijk van de kritische
leescultuur. Dat is wat wij moeten zien te voorkomen. Denk aan
bijvoorbeeld de invloed die een firma als Adobe op dit moment heeft op
de vormgeving. Daar kun je vraagtekens bij zetten. **JS** Bestaat er
voor jou iets als de ‘politiek van het uitgeven’?

**GL** Uitgeven heeft altijd te maken met keuzes maken, met welke
technologie of welk platform je ook werkt. En er moet tijd en geld
worden geïnvesteerd in processen als het redigeren, het opmaken en het
verzorgen van het boek of de publicatie. Als er dus zoiets is als de
‘politiek van het uitgeven’ dan gaat die over de allocatie van schaarse,
financiële middelen ten bate van een diversiteit. En om ervoor te zorgen
dat er een bepaalde complexiteit bereikt kan worden in het vertoog, en
dat die in de maatschappij en in het onderwijs kan worden gereproduceerd
en gedistribueerd. Het uitgeven speelt een verantwoordelijke rol in de
kennis en de verfijnde taal die het mogelijk maakt om onze gevoelens,
meningen en reflecties adequaat uit te drukken. En dat is een heel
politieke rol.

**JS** In Nederland is gezegd: “Kunsttijdschriften krijgen geen
subsidies meer”. En er is dus die angst dat het verliezen van subsidies
wellicht een deprofessionalisering en een vervlakking in de hand zou
werken. Omdat er minder geld is, moet je goedkoper materiaal gaan
gebruiken, of oud materiaal hergebruiken, of kun je auteurs bijna niets
meer betalen, of je moet met partijen samenwerken die andere belangen
hebben, enz. Zijn wij wel voldoende in staat om onze oude denk- en
werkwijzen los te laten en tot nieuwe oplossingen te komen?

**GL** Een publicatie moet toch een bepaalde kritische massa bereiken,
want dan is er ook de mogelijkheid om tot een bepaalde complexiteit
komen en die te handhaven. Dus één van de dingen die zou moeten gebeuren
is dat redacties, uitgevers en schrijvers zich beter gaan organiseren,
om zo met elkaar die kritische massa in bepaalde gebieden te bereiken.
Dan treedt die verschraling waar jij het over hebt minder op. Als je
graag wilt dat kunst en cultuur een meer kritisch, complex en rijk
vertoog vertegenwoordigen, dan zul je mensen bij elkaar moeten brengen
in een soort dwingende verbanden waarin zowel duidelijk wordt wat het
gemeenschappelijke is als wat de verschillen zijn. **JS** Het
Nederlandse cultuurbeleid is op dit moment zeer vaag. Denk je dat de
bevindingen die jullie doen op het gebied van digitaal publiceren
verdisconteerd zouden moeten worden in een nieuw cultuurbeleid? Zouden
het Mondriaanfonds en de andere fondsen actiever kunnen meewerken aan
een omslag of aan het tot stand brengen van die dwingende verbanden?

**GL** Een van de grote problemen binnen het huidige cultuurbeleid is
dat beeldende kunst en design tegen elkaar worden uitgespeeld. En dit
breekt alles af wat we in de afgelopen decennia in Nederland hebben
opgebouwd. Design zonder beeldende kunst bestaat helemaal niet en
beeldende kunst heeft altijd een toegepast element.

**JS** Bedoel je dat deze gebieden op dit moment op niet-productieve
wijze tegen elkaar worden uit gespeeld ten bate van het denken in termen
van de markt en de zogenaamde creatieve industrie? En dat hierdoor
nieuwe ontwikkelingen en mogelijkheden in het digitaal publiceren en
uitgeven niet in al hun dimensies kunnen worden uitgewerkt?

**GL** Ja. De vragen die op tafel liggen zijn groot en die kunnen we
alleen maar gezamenlijk oplossen, en niet door deze twee domeinen tegen
elkaar op te zetten. Het is volstrekt kunstmatig om ze los van elkaar te
zien. De discussie gaat niet over die goede, autonome beeldende kunst
die zo zielig is en niet op eigen benen kan staan, en ook niet over de
boosaardige, creatieve industrie. Het gaat over het feit dat ze niet in
relatie tot elkaar gezien worden. Eigenlijk gaat het om een boze droom.
Laten we deze desastreuze fase zo snel mogelijk afsluiten!

Jorinde Seijdel is auteur, redacteur, spreker, adviseur en
kunsttheoreticus. Ze is hoofdredacteur van Open! Platform voor Kunst,
Cultuur & het Publieke Domein. Momenteel is ze docent bij de Gerrit
Rietveld Academie in Amsterdam en theoriementor bij het Dutch Art
Institute (MFA ArtEZ) in Arnhem. Seijdel is ook adviseur bij de
Adviescommissie Beeldende Kunst en Vormgeving van de gemeente Utrecht.

Geert Lovink is mediatheoreticus en internetcriticus. Sinds 2004 is hij
lector aan de Hogeschool van Amsterdam. Zijn lectoraat is het Instituut
voor Netwerkcultuur (www.networkcultures.org) waar onderzoek wordt
gedaan naar online video, sociale media, Wikipedia, zoekmachines,
verdienmodellen, publieke schermen en de creatieve industrie. Lovink is
ook professor Mediatheorie aan de European Graduate School in Saas-Fee
(Zwitserland) en is verbonden aan het Centre for Digital Culture van de
Leuphana Universität in Lüneburg (Duitsland). Zijn recente boeken zijn
‘Zero Comments’ uit 2007 en ‘Networks Without a Cause’ uit 2012, beide
verschenen in het Engels, Duits en Italiaans.



# Embedding a Custom Set of Metadata Based on Dublin Core Metadata Initiative Into a MultiMarkdown Document {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
October 9, 2013 at 3:57 pm.

(updated on the 21st of October)

— INC subgroup

In this post I’ll treat the issues that emerge from the proposal of
embedding a custom set of metadata, based on the Dublin Core standard,
within a MultiMarkdown document.

The metadata set here employed is an extremely simplified version of
what it is needed in our research project, but it gives anyway several
insights that are useful in the definition of a more complex set.

The work is divided in 2 phases:

1.  the set of metadata is defined into a Dublin Core Application
    Profile (DCAP);
2.  the ways to insert the DCAP within a MultiMarkdown document are
    discussed.



## What Metadata?

1.  Metadata tied to workflow and production. Those allow to structure a
    text in such a way that, with the help of a style sheet, different
    kinds of output technologies (and formats) can be used.
2.  Metadata as the translation table between the tags under **1.** and
    the output appearance. E.g. `This is a Title` has a
    related list in which it is stipulated that on paper words in the
    field title are printed Bold face in Green. In the same list it is
    stipulated that on a B&W e-reader it is only Bold.
3.  Metadata for keywords and classifications. Here a word or small
    noun-phrase is tagged with a tag that is coupled to a glossary
    orontology in which the meaning of the term is given. E.g.
    `<glossA23>Spinach</glossA23>` means the word spinach according to
    glossary A (vegetables) is defined in field 23.
4.  Metadata that deal with navigation e.g. anchors in an hypertext
    environment.

## Why Embedding Metadata into MMD?

Embedding Metadata directly into MMD means that:

1.  the context of a document is bound to its content, so even if the
    document is considered in itself it still tells its context (author,
    date, etc.);
2.  the one who inserts the metadata only needs to know the MMD syntax
    so that she can use her preferred software to compile a document;
3.  the one who inserts the metadata could use –but is not bound to– any
    interface with custom forms.

An index of all the documents is then created according to a “media
player” model (already used for e-books like in tools like
[Calibre](http://calibre-ebook.com/)). The metadata of each document are
directly extracted and updated each time a document is modified.

## A Simplified Version of the Metadata Set Mapped to Dublin Core

Following the Dublin Core’s
[MyBookCase](http://dublincore.org/documents/profile-guidelines/)
example we define a simplified version of our metadata set by creating a
Dublin Core Application Profile (DCAP).

### Functional Requirements

First we list the functional requirements for our DCAP:

-   Retrieve articles through a title or an author search;
-   Sort retrieved items by publication date;
-   Sort retrieved items by editing date;
-   Provide the author’s name and affiliation for contact purposes.
-   Sort different typologies of articles, such as blogposts or essays;
-   Arrange the articles according to the project they belong to;
-   Retrieve a certain part of an article, such as the abstract;
-   Retrieve specific information within the text, such as names of
    people or organizations that are mentioned into it.

### Domain Model

Then we develop a [domain
model](http://dublincore.org/documents/profile-guidelines/#sect-4):

The domain model for IncPubBeta has 3 *things*: **Projects**,
**Articles** and **Persons** (the authors of the articles). The domain
model therefore consists of:

An **Article** that belongs to a **Project** and is authored by a
**Person**.

![Domain Model](imgs/Screen-Shot-2013-09-30-at-3.18.13-PM.png)

Now we select or define metadata:

An **Article**:

-   may have a **Title**;
-   may have a **Publication Date**;
-   may have an **Edited Date**;
-   may have a **Type** (blogpost or essay);
-   may have an **Abstract**;
-   may have one or more **Agents** mentioned (such as people or
    organizations);
-   may have a **Parent** project;
-   may have one or more **Authors**.

A **Parent** is a **Project** that has:

-   a **Title**;

An **Author** is a **Person** that has:

-   a **Name**;
-   an **Affiliation**.

### Metadata Evaluation

At this stage we evaluate the possibilty to use terms from existing
vocabularies in our DCPA:

#### Article

For the **Title** we can use
[*dcterms:title*](http://dublincore.org/documents/2012/06/14/dcmi-terms/?v=elements#title),
simply defined as “A name given to the resource”. It takes a free text
as value.

**Publication Date** is mapped to
[*dcterms:date*](http://dublincore.org/documents/2012/06/14/dcmi-terms/?v=terms#date),
formatted according to the [W3C Date and Time Formats
Specification](http://www.w3.org/TR/NOTE-datetime).

**Edited Date** is mapped to
[*dcterms:modified*](http://dublincore.org/documents/2012/06/14/dcmi-terms/?v=terms#modified),
formatted according to the [W3C Date and Time Formats
Specification](http://www.w3.org/TR/NOTE-datetime).

**Type** is mapped to
[*dcterms:type*](http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/type), defined as “the
nature or genre of the resource”. It uses a domain specific vocabulary
limited in our case to the following values:

-   Essay;
-   Blogpost.

**Abstract** is mapped to
[*dcterms:abstract*](http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms/#terms-abstract)
and it is defined as ”a summary of the resource”.

**Agent** is mapped to
[*foaf:agent*](http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/#term_Agent) and it is defined
as ”an agent (eg. person, group, software or physical artifact)”.

**Parent** is mapped to
[*dcterms:isPartOf*](http://dublincore.org/documents/2012/06/14/dcmi-terms/?v=terms#isPartOf),
defined as “a related resource in which the described resource is
physically or logically included”. It is used with a non-literal value
in order to be described with multiple components.

**Author** is mapped to [*dcterms:creators*][dcdatesub], defined as “an
entity primarily responsible for making the resource“. It is used with a
non-literal value in order to be described with multiple components.

#### Parent as Project

**Title** is mapped to
[*dcterms:title*](http://dublincore.org/documents/2012/06/14/dcmi-terms/?v=elements#title)
and it takes a free text as value.

#### Author as Person:

**Name** is mapped to
[*foaf:name*](http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/#term_name) (part of the FOAF
vocabulary), defined as “a name for some thing”.

**Affiliation** is mapped to
[*foaf:workplaceHomepage*](http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/#term_workplaceHomepage)(part
of the FOAF vocabulary), defined as “a workplace homepage of some
person; the homepage of an organization they work for”. It takes the URL
of the workplace as value.

## Summary

Two vocabularies are used in our DCAP:

-   [DCMI Metadata Terms](http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms/);
-   [FOAF Vocabulary](http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/).

## Description Set Profile

We design our Metadata Record, called *IncPubBeta*, with a Description
Set Profile (DSP) which is technology-agnostic.

    DescriptionSet: IncPubBeta
        Description template: Article
        minimum = 1; maximum = unlimited
            Statement template: title
            minimum = 1; maximum = 1
                Property: http://purl.org/dc/terms/title
                Type of Value = "literal"
            Statement template: dateCreated
            minimum = 1; maximum = 1
                Property: http://purl.org/dc/terms/created
                Type of Value = "literal"
                Syntax Encoding Scheme URI = http://purl.org/dc/terms/W3CDTF
            Statement template: dateModified
            minimum = 1; maximum = 1
                Property: http://purl.org/dc/terms/modified
                Type of Value = "literal"
                Syntax Encoding Scheme URI = http://purl.org/dc/terms/W3CDTF
            Statement template: type
            minimum = 1; maximum = 1
                Property: http://purl.org/dc/terms/type
                Type of Value = "literal"
                takes list = yes
            Statement template: abstract
            minimum = 1; maximum = 1
                Property: http://purl.org/dc/terms/abstract
                Type of Value = "literal"
            Statement template: agent
            minimum = 0; maximum = unlimited
                Property: http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/agent
                Type of Value = "literal"
            Statement template: parent
            minimum = 0; maximum = unlimited 
                Property: http://purl.org/dc/terms/isPartOf
                Type of Value = "non-literal"
                defined as = project 
            Statement template: author
            minimum = 0; maximum = unlimited 
                Property: http://purl.org/dc/terms/creator
                Type of Value = "non-literal"
                defined as = person

        Description template: Project id=project
        minimum = 1; maximum = unlimited
            Statement template: title
            minimum = 1; maximum = 1
                Property: http://purl.org/dc/terms/title
                Type of Value = "literal"

        Description template: Person id=person
        minimum = 1; maximum = unlimited
            Statement template: name
                Property: http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/name
                minimum = 1; maximum = 1 
                Type of Value = "literal"
            Statement template: affiliation
                Property: http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/name
                minimum = 1; maximum = 1 
                Type of Value = “non-literal"
                value URI = mandatory

## Support for Metadata in MultiMarkdown

MultiMarkdown
[features](https://github.com/fletcher/MultiMarkdown/wiki/MultiMarkdown-Syntax-Guide#metadata)
the possibility to insert metadata at the beginning of the document in
the following way:

    Title: This is the title  
    Author: John Doe
    Affiliation: MIT

## Comparison Between our DCAP and MultiMarkdown Default Metadata

In the comparison between our DCAP and MultiMarkdown default metadata
set we will particularly consider two aspects:

-   legibility, which is a key issue in Markdown language;
-   adherence to a shared standard for defining metadata.

### Article’s Title

**Title** could be seamlessly mapped to
[*Title*](https://github.com/fletcher/MultiMarkdown/wiki/MultiMarkdown-Syntax-Guide#title)
metadata, present in MultiMarkdown and defined as follows.

> Used to provide the official title of a document. This is set as the
> `` string within the `<head>` section of an HTML document, and
> is also used by other export formats.

    Title: This is my title

### Publication Date

**Publication Date** could be seamlessly mapped to
[*Date*](https://github.com/fletcher/MultiMarkdown/wiki/MultiMarkdown-Syntax-Guide#date)
metadata, present in MultiMarkdown and defined as follows.

> Provide a date for the document.

Even though MMD doesn’t provide any particular way to fomat dates, it is
preferable to adhere to [W3C Dates and Times
Formats](http://www.w3.org/TR/NOTE-datetime).

    Date: 2012-10-08

### Edited Date

There is no metadata similar to **Edited Date** in MMD. So I propose
*Modified* metadata to stick with the DC syntax.

    Modified: 2013-10-08

### Type

There is no metadata similar to **Type** in MMD. So we propose *Type*
metadata to stick with the DC syntax. It allows for a custom vocabulary.

    Type: Blogpost

### Parent Project’s Title

There is no metadata similar to **Parent** in MMD. So I propose
*Project* to give an immediate idea of what this metadata is about.

    Project: My project’s Title

### Author’s Name

The **Name** of an **Author** could be seamlessly mapped to
[*Author*](https://github.com/fletcher/MultiMarkdown/wiki/MultiMarkdown-Syntax-Guide#author)
metadata, present in MultiMarkdown and defined as follows.

> Self-explanatory. I strip this out to provide an author string to
> LaTeX documents. Also used as the sender for letterhead and envelope
> templates.

    Author: John Doe

### Author’s Affiliation

The **Affiliation** of an **Author** could be seamlessly mapped to
[*Affiliation*](https://github.com/fletcher/MultiMarkdown/wiki/MultiMarkdown-Syntax-Guide#affiliation)
metadata, present in MultiMarkdown and defined as follows.

> Use this to include an organization that the author is affiliated
> with, e.g. a university, company, or organization.

In our case we will limit the values to URLs.

    Affiliation: http://www.international.hva.nl/

This is off course problematic in case the workplace homepage moves to
another address.

The **Affiliation** is dependent to a specific **Author**, so ways to
express this dependency are needed., specifically in case of multiple
authors.

#### Affiliation Consequent to Name

A possibility could be to insert **Affiliation** consequently to
**Author**, like in the following example.

    Author: John Doe
    Affiliation: http://www.international.hva.nl/
    Author: Mario Rossi
    Affiliation: http://www.unimi.it/

### Abstract

In order to identify the **Abstract** within a MMD document, it is
necessary to implement some extra syntax. Following there are some
references and possibilities listed.

#### LaTEX

In
[LaTEX](http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/LaTeX/Document_Structure#Abstract)
an Abstract is identified in the following way.

    begin{abstract}
    Your abstract goes here
    
    end{abstract}

This could be simplified for MMD in the following way.

    abstract
    Your abstract goes here

In this case a blank line would represent the end of the abstract. The
advantage of this solution would be that the abstract is not written
more than once. The solution is not MMD compatible.

#### Pandoc’s Markdown

The software Pandoc has an extended Markdown
[syntax](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML) that includes the
possibility to insert an abstract within a
[YAML](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML) object in the following way:

    ---
    abstract: |
      This is the abstract.

      It consists of two paragraphs.
    
    ---

    #{abstract}

The syntax is conflicting with MMD because `---` is used to draw an
horizontal line.

#### HTML5

Another possibility could be to insert the abstract within a `section`
tag.

    
         This is the abstract.

         It consists of two paragraphs.
    

The solution doesn’t conflict with MMD and allows to write the abstract
only once. The main drawback is on the readability of the text.

### Agent

As for the abstract, a way to tag **Agents** (such as people,
organizations, institutions) within the document is desirable. Following
there are some references and possibilities listed.

#### LaTEX

LaTEX uses the following way to define nouns.

    noun{Jack} and noun{Joe Bloggs} went up the hill.

A simple way to do this in MMD could be the following.

    [Jack]{agent} and [Joe Bloggs]{agent} went up the hill.

And in the case of having a link to tag as agent, one could do like
this:

    [Jack](http://jack.com){agent} went up the hill.

The solution, similar to [Markdown Extra’s Special
Attributes](http://michelf.ca/projects/php-markdown/extra/#spe-attr), is
only a proposal and it doesn’t work in MMD.

#### Semantic MediaWiki

In [Semantic
MediaWiki](http://semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki), an
extension to MediaWiki, it is possible to tag links and normal text in
the following ways.

    This article has the following agent: [[Agent::John Doe]].
    This article has the following agent: [[Has Agent::John Doe]].

A possible solution in MMD would be to keep the syntax as is, even
though the result is less legible.

#### HTML5

Another possibility could be to insert the agent within a `span` tag.

    This is an agent: Bruno Latour.

The solution doesn’t conflict with MMD. The main drawback is again the
readability of the text.

## Example of the Whole Set within MMD

Here’s an example of the whole set of metadata as proposed above. In the
case of **Abstract** and **Agent**, the HTML5 solutions are employed.

    Title: This is my title  
    Date: 2012-10-08
    Modified: 2013-10-08  
    Type: Blogpost  
    Project: My project’s Title
    Author: John Doe
    Affiliation: http://www.international.hva.nl/
    Author: Mario Rossi
    Affiliation: http://www.unimi.it/

    
        This is the abstract.

        It consists of two paragraphs.
    

    # “This is my title”
    ## Part of *My project’s Title*

    This is an agent: Bruno Latour.

## Conclusions

Even though the proposed scenario that employs HTML5 is fully functional
within MMD, some issue regarding the legibility of code (main concern
while using MMD) do arise. In order to extract the metadata correctly, a
preprocessor is anyway needed. A possibility not treated in the post is
to include DC metadata directly as HTML header. This solution was
consciously avoided because it totally breaks the legibility.

## Resources

-   [Guidelines for Dublin Core Application
    Profiles](http://dublincore.org/documents/profile-guidelines/);
-   [Dublin Core User
    Guide](http://wiki.dublincore.org/index.php/User_Guide);
-   [MultiMarkdown Syntax
    Guide](https://github.com/fletcher/MultiMarkdown/wiki/MultiMarkdown-Syntax-Guide);
-   [Sematic Tagging in
    Markdown](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/8783641/semantic-tagging-in-markdown);
-   [Additional Markdown We Need in Scholarly
    Texts](http://blogs.plos.org/mfenner/2012/12/18/additional-markdown-we-need-in-scholarly-texts/)
    by Martin Fenner;
-   [Fountain](http://fountain.io/syntax), a plain text markup language
    for screenwriting based on Markdown;
-   [Introduction to Semantic
    MediaWiki](http://semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Help:Introduction_to_Semantic_MediaWiki).



# Translating a paper book design to a simple e-pub design {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Miriam
Rasch](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/michael/ "Posts by Miriam Rasch"),
October 8, 2013 at 2:15 pm.

![](imgs/CWW_ontwerp16.jpg)

![](imgs/CWW_ontwerp7.jpg)

*A contribution by Meeusontwerpt*

The subgroup of Valiz, Meeus Ontwerpt and Puntpixel has set out to
create a digital version of two editions in a new series by Valiz called
Context Without Walls. The paper versions of Context Without Walls –
books containing essays about and works by a contemporary artist – are
being designed by Meeus Ontwerpt and are full of design and conversion
challenges. Some of these include working with image-filled essays,
references in the margins and notes. As starting point we have decided
to try and make a simple e-pub that works even on the most primitive
devices (like e-readers). This means we cannot do too many crazy things
(regarding interactivity, but also with respect to the lay-out).
Therefore the result of this simple version will be quite dry. However,
by thinking well about details we want to make sure a certain quality
and a connection with the original book design are maintained.



**What did we do design wise, in order to achieve this? (For images,
scroll down)**

-   Convert the print colors to matching RGB colors (of course you
    cannot see the colors on every device, but we didn’t want to skip
    the colors completely).
-   Adjust the cover design to a one-language book (the original book is
    bilingual).
-   Start from a single-page design instead of a design in spreads.
-   Choose open source typefaces (through Google font) that come close
    to the original typefaces and that work well for the screen (Libre
    Baskerville instead of Plantin en Cabin instead of Akzidenz
    Grotesk).
-   Define styles for the text, titles, subtitles, notes, and keywords
    that work well for the screen (for instance the use of whitespace
    and notes, which are not shown in superscript, but in between
    brackets and in a color).
-   Set a standard rule for the use of images in between the text: there
    always must be three small images that form one image together. In
    this way the images still resemble the small images in the margin of
    the paper book.
-   Translate the visual essay in the heart of the paper book into an
    e-version. For example, in the paper book we use black as a
    background color, but in the e-pub that could turn out ugly since
    extra white margins might appear around the screen, that’s why we
    choose a white background here.
-   Add a content page in big letters, so it is easily clickable (this
    content page can exist next to the automatically generated content
    page of the device).
-   Add extra features that make the e-pub similar to the paper book,
    like endpapers.

**What is the next step?**

Puntpixel is making a generator that creates an e-pub, based on the
input of text in mark-up language. The design of the books will be
translated into the right CSS styles to use in this generator, so the
final e-pub is going to look like the original paper design.

Then we will have a simple e-pub that can be tested on different
devices. And the good thing is we also have a system to convert a whole
book to an e-pub (since we are working with a series that comes in very
handy). The important thing we have to sort out is how to easily make a
mark-up document from for instance a Word document.

The next step is to create a more complicated e-pub (e-pub 3), with more
possibilities concerning interactivity and layout. Unfortunately such a
version won’t be able to work on all the readers / devices. What we
would like from such an elaborate e-pub we don’t know yet, that’s
something we still have to decide together.

![](imgs/CWW_omslag_papier.jpg)

![](imgs/CWW_ontwerp.jpg)

![](imgs/CWW_Binnenwerk_papier4.jpg)

![](imgs/CWW_ontwerp5.jpg)

![](imgs/CWW_binnenwerk_papier_beeldcahier2.jpg)

![](imgs/CWW_ontwerp20.jpg)

![](imgs/CWW_ontwerp2.jpg)



# HTML5 and “Digital First” Content Development {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
October 7, 2013 at 10:29 am.

> Anyone who truly wants to engage with the challenge posed by [the
> popularization of tablets] and be a part of evolving the medium of the
> “book” needs to take seriously the notion of digital-first content
> development. Being digital first means refusing to make the ebook
> version of your content an afterthought. The digital format of the
> book should not be merely a postproduction conversion of print-bound
> manuscript files; nor should it be an ex post facto “enhanced” version
> of content that has already been completed— for example, adding in a
> few video clips at the end of an otherwise static text. From
> conception to publication, true digital-first content is designed to
> take full advantage of the capabilities offered by dedicated ereaders,
> tablets, and smartphones to create something that is native to the
> platform.
>
> There is no other source content format better suited to the task of
> developing digital-first content for the diverse ecosystem of ereading
> devices than HTML5, because you can develop directly for the browser
> (ereader software engines are effectively specialized Web browsers).
> As I argue in “The Case for Authoring and Producing Books in
> (X)HTML5,” authoring in HTML5 makes it “trivial to
> integrate…digital-first elements directly into the manuscript”

Source: [HTML5 is the Future of Book Authorship, The key advantages of
the HTML5 platform for authors and
publishers](http://programming.oreilly.com/2013/09/html5-is-the-future-of-book-authorship.html#more-63383)
by Sanders Kleinfeld, September 19, 2013



# “Just say no to ebook CSS and JS” by Baldur Bjarnason {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
October 4, 2013 at 7:49 pm.

> An ebook that doesn’t have structure is broken and unacceptable. […]
> The more I discover about existing publisher ebook production
> processes, the more I talk to people ‘on the inside’, the clearer it
> becomes that a substantial portion of existing ebook inventory is
> quite simply rubbish. No structure. Crap stylesheet. Broken markup. So
> I propose that ereader vendors simply turn all publisher styles off
> and never even consider enabling javascript. […] In exchange, what we
> need you to do is to improve your built-in stylesheets. We need you to
> support common markup practices like figures and captions, headings
> and subheadings, horizontal rules that don’t look like a 90s flashback
> and so on. Best if you support them both in markup patterns and as
> class-based microformats.

[“Just say no to ebook CSS and
JS”](http://studiotendra.com/2013/10/02/just-say-no-to-ebook-css-and-js/),
Baldur Bjarnason, 2 October 2013



# BiblioTech – a modern library {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
October 4, 2013 at 2:21 pm.

The rise of e-books not only poses problems for publishers, it also asks
to rethink the position or function of the library. Bexar County’s
(Texas) Judge Nelson Wolff envisioned
[BiblioTech](http://bexarbibliotech.org), the first public digital
library. A modern library that will ‘store’ just e-books, not physical
books.

> “Through BiblioTech, residents of Bexar County will be able to access
> approximately 10,000 current titles through e-readers that they can
> check out to take home or read on the premises.  Residents will also
> be able to use their own e-readers or tablets to access the
> collection.” ^[1](#fn:1)^

![Conceptual renderings of Bexar County's digital-only BilblioTech
library Bexar County Commissioners Court.\<br /\>
](imgs/ht_digital_library_interior_jef_130114_wg.jpg) *Conceptual
renderings of Bexar County’s digital-only BilblioTech library Bexar
County Commissioners Court*

 If we have to believe the image above, this
modern library will look a lot like Apple stores. It will be filled with
aisles of computers and gadgets instead of physical books. It is great
that BiblioTech tries to bring these services to people who do not
necessarily have access to technologies to read e-books. However, when a
library is not limited by the amount of books it can physically store,
or exchange between several nearby libraries, then why is there still a
limit of 10.000 current titles? How modern is this concept of a library?

When moving from physical books to e-books there is no real limitation
to the amount of books you can offer to the public. Current costumer
hard drives of one terabyte allow you to store 500,000,000 pages of
reading. More than you can read in a lifetime. And for instance P2P
systems like Kazaa or Limewire allow you to access and share these files
through the Internet. Moreover, e-books can be copied endlessly. You
don’t need to return your copy to the library so someone else can borrow
it as well. You can keep your ‘personal’ copy and even add notes and
annotations, and in this manner create your personal library.

The limitation of 10.000 books thus seems to be build around proprietary
regimes and copyright laws that limit the exchange of knowledge instead
of allowing the free flow of easily copied, shared and stored e-books.
From this perspective the library is seen as a warehouse that stocks
information and ideas, managing the rights to lent these books to you.
Essentially it limits the amount of information you can access instead
of opening it up. Instead of rethinking the possibilities of a digital
library, BiblioTech copies the tactics of the libraries we already know
– it seems you even have to return the e-books you ‘lent’.

However, a more intriguing concept that helps to rethink the function of
the library, and look beyond these principles of copyright, is the
‘personal portable library’ conceptualized by Henry Warwick. He will
publish the essay ‘Sharing is Caring’ within the [network
notebooks](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/portal/publications/) series
of [the Institute of Network
Cultures](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/portal/) about this topic
shortly.

His concept builds on the fact that it is now more easy than ever to
copy and share e-books, or more specifically to share complete
*libraries* stored on one single hard drive neatly managed and
preferable with a directory to help retrieve the books. He builds on
older notions of the library and moves away from the idea of the library
as warehouse. As he explains the older libraries were copy-making
centers, copying every clay tablet or papyrus roll they could gather.
This changed when the printing press mechanized the process of copying
books.

> “With this mechanisation came several changes to the purpose and
> meaning of the library. As a printing press was an expensive piece of
> gear, there was a high investment cost in printing books. The result
> was the development of copyright laws to protect the interests of
> capital and its investment in production. Libraries ceased to be
> centres of copying and became warehouses of information.” ^[2](#fn:2)^

Creating a digital library as yet another place to gate keep our access
to copyrighted material is in a sense very modern, but e-books allow us
to exploit the original role of libraries as copy-centres as explained
by Warnick. Instead of copying one book per month we can copy whole
libraries in an hour or less. So why go to an all digital library if you
can only read 10.000 books?



# Readmill – Social E-Books {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
September 3, 2013 at 2:46 pm.

Michael Grothaus, a technology journalist, talked to Henrik Beggren, CEO
of a small but growing app Readmill. In his article [E-Books Could Be
The Future Of Social
Media](http://www.fastcolabs.com/3016658/e-books-could-be-the-ultimate-niche-social-networks) he
describes how Readmill approaches e-books as “its own self-contained
social network”, and how this can change book publishing on different
levels.

> “Talking with him, I discovered that compared to what Readmill is
> planning, today’s e-books might as well be dusty scrolls of parchment.
> In the future, e-books are going to explode beyond just containing
> stories, becoming niche social networks where we discuss our favorite
> passages with other readers and even authors and publishers buy our
> data to make more informed decisions. So hold on tight, book lovers.
> Reading as we know it will soon change, forever.” Source: [E-Books
> Could Be The Future Of Social
> Media](http://www.fastcolabs.com/3016658/e-books-could-be-the-ultimate-niche-social-networks),
> Michael Grothaus, August 30 2013



# Event: Contec – Redefining the experience of publishing {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
September 3, 2013 at 2:59 pm.

\*\*CONTEC is a new, highly-engaging event experience created by the
Frankfurt Academy to address the complexity of the needs of today’s
publishing business. \*\*8th of October, Frankfurt \*\*\*\*





CONTEC gathers stakeholders from across the publishing ecosystem – from
STM and trade publishers to service providers and tech startups – in one
arena to redefine and redesign the experience of publishing. With a
special focus on new voices and technological innovations in publishing,
CONTEC highlights current trends, opens new horizons and provides
insights into an industry that continues to be in flux. It creates a
space for dialogue and market transparency. For more information about
the programme you can go
[here](http://www.buchmesse.de/en/academy/programme/00518/)







# Print+Ebook Bundling {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
September 2, 2013 at 3:59 pm.

> There are many arguments in favor of including an ebook download with
> the physical book: it adds value to the physical book, it enables
> booksellers to sell digital books alongside print (and customers to
> buy ebooks in shops, where they discover them) and most importantly,
> it’s just downright convenient. Much like the music industry’s pairing
> of vinyl records with MP3 downloads, by bundling print and digital,
> publishers can meet readers’ demand to consume media in both digital
> and analog forms.

Source: [Ghost in the Machine: Does Print+Ebook Bundling Have a
Future?](Ghost%20in%20the%20Machine:%20Does%20Print+Ebook%20Bundling%20Have%20a%20Future?),
Joy Hawley, August 26, 2013.



# .Docx to MarkDown using Calibre and Pandoc {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
August 30, 2013 at 2:30 pm.

![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2013-08-30-at-12.39.21-PM.png)

![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2013-08-30-at-12.34.33-PM.png)

This post documents the outcomes of a new feature of
[Calibre](http://calibre-ebook.com/) available in version 1.0: docx
conversion. The docx file is firstly converted to HTMLZ in order to be
converted again to MarkDown through
[Pandoc](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/). An automated version of the
process (bash script) is available at the bottom.

We are going to use a test document provided by **Calibre** team,
downloadable [here](http://calibre-ebook.com/downloads/demos/demo.docx).
The document has the following features:



![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2013-08-30-at-12.26.17-PM.png)
Test Document in .docx, shown in LibreOffice



-   Inline formatting
-   Fonts
-   Paragraph level formatting
-   Tables
-   Footnotes & Endnotes
-   Dropcaps
-   Links
-   Table of Contents
-   Images
-   Lists

First, we convert the .docx to HTMLZ using **Calibre**. To do so add the
test document to Calibre and right-click to convert it individually.

Choose HTMLZ as output format click OK. You will then find your .htmlz
in the containing folder of your document (right-click on the element \>
Open containing folder).

The HTMLZ is a
[zip](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/08/DOCX-Demo-Kovid-Goyal.zip)
file containing an HTML file along with images, style, etc. Therefore in
order to access those files simply change the extensions from .htmlz to
.zip and uncompress.

The result of the conversion is pretty decent: except for “Paragraph
level formatting”, everything else is preserved, especially footnotes
(that were the most labour intensive issue in the [previous
processes](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/07/notes-on-converting-a-doc-to-multimarkdown/)
and still not solved).



![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2013-08-30-at-12.46.02-PM.png)
The HTML document



Let’s now use **Pandoc** to convert the .html to MarkDown.

    pandoc -f html -t markdown -o output.html your_forlder/index.html 

Here you can download the [output MarkDown
file](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/08/output.md).



![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2013-08-30-at-1.02.25-PM.png)
The MarkDown output as shown in Mou



Let’s now go through the features.

**Inline formatting**

-   Bold and italic are preserved, even though there are problems when
    they are one next to each other;
-   Underlined, struck out, superscript, subscript, colors, highlight
    are not preserved.

**Fonts**

**Paragraph level formatting**

**Tables**

**Footnotes & Endnotes**

**Dropcaps**

**Links**

**Table of Contents**

**Images**

**Lists**

### Automated version of the process (bash script)

In order to use the automated version you need:

1.  Calibre’s Command Line Interface activated: On OS X you have to go
    to Preferences-\>Advanced-\>Miscellaneous and click install command
    line tools to make the command line tools available. On other
    platforms, just start a terminal and type the command.
2.  An unzip tool: on OS X I use “unzip”.

<!-- -->

    #!/bin/bash
    mkdir temp
    cp $1 temp
    cd temp
    ebook-convert $1 output.htmlz
    unzip output.htmlz
    cd ..
    pandoc -f html -t markdown -o output.md temp/index.html
    rm -R temp



# Landscape Digital Publishing research PDF {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Arjen de
Jong](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/arjen-2/ "Posts by Arjen de Jong"),
July 30, 2013 at 3:06 pm.

**In cooperation with BIS publishers, Essense kicked off their work with
a research PDF that explores the digital publishing landscape.**

As we started working on this project we realized that the parties that
participate in the ‘consortium’ have different levels of understanding
of publishing in the digital realm. Also the field is overflowing with
formats, standards and businessmodels. We therefore created a research
PDF that firstly introduces the landscape of digital publishing, and
secondly looks at research & design issues that are relevant to the
publisher (BIS) we are currently working with.

The *Landscape* PDF [can be downloaded
here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/07/LandscapeDigitalPubl_DPTSTIJL.pdf "research PDF").

![Digital-publishing-Journey](imgs/Digital-publishing-Journey.png)

A Digital Publication Journey by Essense showing the route from
*maker(s)* to *reader*, a vizualisation that also indicates players,
platforms and Formats.

Our collegues of PuntPixel also created a comprehensive post about
[Jargon, Platforms & Publication
Formats](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/06/digital-publications-in-practice/).



# Notes on Converting a .doc to MultiMarkdown {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
July 23, 2013 at 6:34 pm.

As stated in a [previous
post](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/07/converting-a-doc-to-markdown/),
there is no direct and straightforward tool to convert a .doc to
Markdown. Of course the same goes for MultiMarkdown (MMD). In this post
I’ll document the process adopted to convert the file, which is partly
automated, partly manual. As a test document I use an
[article](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/07/lodi.doc)
that has the following features:



[Mou](http://mouapp.com/) for Mac as editor because it’s a freeware.
**Metadata** I start adding the standard metadata as suggested in the
[MMD’s guide](http://fletcher.github.io/peg-multimarkdown/).

    Title:             This is the Title of the Article  
    Author:            Author Name  
    Affiliation:       https://twitter.com/AuthorName  
    Date:              2013  
    Base Header Level: 1  
    Copyright:         All Rights Reserved
     In addition to the standard metadata (that are not mandatory), it is possible to add any custom metadata that is needed. Considering that the aim of this would be to have source files to publish articles to different formats such as ePub and PDF, some metadata and attributes can be borrowed from the 

[specifications of
IPDF](http://www.idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPF_2.0.1_draft.htm) for ePUB. An
example could be the attribute “file as” used to normalise names.

    Title:             This is the Title of the Article  
    Author:            John Doe  
    Author File As:    Doe, John  
    Affiliation:       https://twitter.com/AuthorName   
    Date:              2013  
    Base Header Level: 1  
    Copyright:         All Rights Reserved
    Subject:           Internet  
    Description:       This is a long description of the article
                       on more than one line  
    Publisher:         Institute of Network Cultures  
    Type:              Article  
    Language:          English
     The fact that attributes are linked to the main metadata (as "file-as" to "author") adds a level of complexity to the organization of the document and the possible validation of it. The set of "linked" metadata should be of course put one next to another and this can't be shown through a blank line that would signify the end of the metadata part. 

**Content** I get the content, with a basic formatting, using **Pandoc**
in conjunction with **textutil** (Mac only) as described more in detail
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/07/converting-a-doc-to-markdown/):

**Headlines** I can now paste the content of “file.md” into the file in
which I set the metadata. In the case of this test document, the
headlines were simply set in bold; so I needed to correct that. From:

    **Title**
    **Subtitle**
     To: 


    #Title
    ##Subtitle

**Footnotes** Converting footnotes is pretty annoying because they’re
all at the end of the documents but the relative numbers, both in the
actual text and outside, are stripped. So I need to find each footnote
in the .doc and recreate it in the .md:

    Here is some text containing a footnote.[^somesamplefootnote]

    [^somesamplefootnote]: Here is the text of the footnote itself.
     Due to the fact that this is done by hand, it is likely that there are mistakes. Generally when this happens the amount of footnotes does not correspond. 

**Hyperlinks** Hyperlinks are easy to add if they are provided with the
“http:” or “www” part. In this case a simple regular expression allows
to add them:

    <&> That makes this: 

    http://exampleurl.com to this: 

    &#60;http://exampleurl.com/&#62; Unfortunately Mou doesn't support Regular Expression so I did this with 

[Coda](https://panic.com/coda/). The regular expression was tested in
real time on [RegExr](http://gskinner.com/RegExr/).
([Here’s](http://net.tutsplus.com/tutorials/other/8-regular-expressions-you-should-know/)
a good starter to Regular Expressions) **Blockquotes** Blockquotes
aren’t indicated in any way in the converted document, so it’s necessary
to find them in the original .doc and adding a “\>” symbol at the
beginning.

**Images** Images are stripped in the converted document; they are added
manually in the following way.

    ![This is the figure caption][fig_id]

    [fig_id]: mmd.png "This is where the title goes" height=45px width=120px

**References** MultiMarkdown provides support for basic citations but,
considering that INC publications have references that are not directly
“linked” within the text (because there are footnotes for that), an
unordered list is probably the easiest solution. Still declaring that
the list is the set of reference would be useful for data retrieval. An
easy way to do so would be adding an HTML comment.

    &#60!--references--&#62
    * Young, Tim. ‘My Book’, 2011. 
    * Doe, John. ‘Book’, 2010.

## Conclusions The resulting MMD document can be downloaded

[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/07/trial.md),
while the output in HTML can be downloaded
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/07/trial.html).
The process to convert a .doc to MultiMarkdown is not straightforward
and has some levels of complexities due to the fact there is no single
tool able to do the conversion in a satisfying way. Several passages
between different softwares are needed and some prior knowledge is
required. Furthermore the conversion requires a good amount of hand
labour, in particular regarding the formatting of the footnotes.



# Converting a .doc to Markdown {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
July 20, 2013 at 4:55 pm.

This posts gathers the preliminary reflections on including Markdown
into the publishing workflow of INC. INC often receives papers and
articles in .doc format. That’s why it is necessary to test the
possibilities for automated conversion from .doc to Markdown.



![](imgs/lodi-doc-in-libreoffice.png)
.doc as rendered by LibreOffice



The test document chosen is in .doc format and it contains:

-   Basic formatting (e.g. bold and italic);
-   Footnotes;
-   References;
-   Blockquotes;
-   Hyperlinks;
-   Images.

# First Method: Textutil (Mac only) + Pandoc

The first method employs the command line tool **textutil** (only
available on Mac), to convert the document to HTML, and the command line
tool [Pandoc](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/).

The advantage of this method is the fact that it only requires a
one-liner:`textutil -convert html file.doc -stdout | pandoc -f html -t markdown -o file.md`

### Outcomes



![](imgs/lodi-markdown-mou.png)
Resulting Markdown as rendered by Mou



**Pros**

-   Basic formatting is preserved;

**Cons**

-   Images are missing;
-   Line breaks are converted into backslashes;
-   Footnotes are put at the end of the document without keeping the
    link within the text;
-   No formatting for blockquotes;
-   There is formatting for hyperlinks, but is not compatible with
    Markdown.

# Second Method: LibreOffice (4.0.4.2) + Pandoc

The second methods consists in exporting the .doc to XHTML via
LibreOffice and then…

### Outcomes



![](imgs/lodi-html-from-libreoffice.png)
The test document converted to HTML via LibreOffice



The HTML code outputted by LibreOffice has a CSS style applied in a
paragraph-specific way, this makes it pretty unreadable.

The HTML is then converted to Markdown via
Pandoc:`pandoc file.html -f html -t markdown -o file.md`

**Pros**

-   Hyperlinks are preserved;

**Cons**

-   Basic formatting is not preserved;
-   Images are included in the markdown but formatted as text, making
    the file impossible to open;
-   There is formatting for footnotes, but is not compatible with
    Markdown.
-   No formatting for blockquotes;
-   There is formatting for hyperlinks, but is not compatible with
    Markdown.

# Conclusions

The first method, Textutil (Mac only) + Pandoc, seems to be more
convenient time-wise. However it is still necessary to add images,
blockquotes, footnotes by hand. Furthermore hyperlinks need to be
reformatted and slashes needs to be deleted.



# Py-clave and Books as API {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
July 19, 2013 at 12:59 pm.

[Gabriele Alese](http://blog.alese.it/api-for-epub/) recently initiated
the project [*py-clave*](https://github.com/gabalese/py-clave), «a
prototype implementation of a set of public RESTful APIs meant to enable
clients to retrieve metadata and contents from a bunch of digital
publications in EPUB2 format».

A presentation on the usefulness of APIs for books by Hugh McGuire,
founder of [PressBooks](http://pressbooks.com/).



# We all (want to) must go digital {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
July 15, 2013 at 11:42 am.

## The lessons publishers can learn from the music, 

Thesis by Tamara Wouda, graduated April 2013, Hogeschool van Amsterdam. 

> Resume:*“What are profitable business models, currently used in the
> music, film and game industry, which could be useful for Meulenhoff
> Boekerij with selling e-books in the fiction genre?”* By conducting
> both desk research and field research Meulenhoff Boekerij can be
> advised about this complex situation.
>
> The desk research consists of a search to various business models in
> the music, film and game industry. To the basis of examples we decided
> if the business models are suitable for selling e-books in the fiction
> genre. It looks like the retail model, the subscription model, the
> free-model and the advertisers model are suitable. Afterwards, we
> looked at examples from abroad. The hopes were high Dutch publishers
> could learn from the developments in the English speaking parts of the
> world, but we got disappointed. Most of their innovative publishing
> ideas were more suitable for the non-fiction genre or would not work
> in the Netherlands due to this complex distribution system. Dutch
> publishers are in a difficult situation, which cannot be compared to
> the American circumstances.
>
> The field research started with ten unstructured in-depth interviews.
> The respondents were five experts from the book industry and five
> experts from the music, film and game industry. Their advice to
> Meulenhoff Boekerij is to offer, together with other Dutch publishing
> houses, convenience for a fair price.
>
> Afterwards we conducted a focus group with four authors. They see
> e-books as an add-on product and they are convinced of the fact the
> paper book will subsist. The authors affiliate with the experts when
> it comes to the sales channel: this has to be a collaborating online
> platform which offers all the e-books published by Dutch publishing
> houses.
>
> To draw the final conclusion: not Meulenhoff Boekerij should use the
> business models to sell e-books in the fiction genre, but there has to
> be a collaboration online platform with all the e-books from the Dutch
> publishing houses. These would all be divided in different genres and
> every genre would have its own ambassador. The ambassadors help
> consumers to pick the right e-book. E-books can be paid apiece, but
> consumers can also take a subscription. Other business models that can
> be used are the advertisers model and the free-model.

Download the full thesis (in Dutch) [Digitaal moeten we
allemaal](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/07/Digitaal-moeten-we-allemaal.pdf)



# Unlike Us Reader in ePub format {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
July 15, 2013 at 5:18 pm.

![uu-epub](imgs/uu-epub.jpg)

The ePub version of the [Unlike Us
Reader](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/portal/publication/unlike-us-reader-social-media-monopolies-and-their-alternatives/),
published by INC, is available. It can be downloaded
[here](https://bitly.com/1399MUd).

This e-book represents the first experimental attempt to provide more
digital versions of INC Readers.

It was developed using InDesign CS6. The adopted procedure is documented
[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/05/epub-development-in-adobe-indesign-cs6/).



# Inpiration for using gestures in digital publication {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Arjen de
Jong](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/arjen-2/ "Posts by Arjen de Jong"),
July 10, 2013 at 11:42 am.

Inspirational video for creating educational content using clever
gestures.

Ted talk by Mike Matas: A next-generation digital book.

<http://www.ted.com/talks/mike_matas.html>



# Book: How the Page Matters by Bonnie Mak {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
July 2, 2013 at 12:01 pm.

# 

> ![](imgs/9781442685369.cover.jpg)Mak’s book, “How the Page Matters,”
> historicizes recent debates about eBooks and similar technologies by
> casting the page as an interface that has been under development since
> the scrolls of Antiquity. “How the Page Matters” tracks the page
> through the manuscripts of the Middle Ages, the printed books of the
> early modern period, and onto digital displays. By locating the page
> in a broader tradition of writing technologies, the book re-examines
> the print and digital ‘revolutions’ and shows that the questions
> raised by digital theorists about the visualization of information are
> not new, but are instead the persistent issues in a long history of
> graphic reproduction. “How the Page Matters” contends that the
> material of the page is constitutive of knowledge; the quality of the
> paper, the shape of letter-forms, and the layout of text and image are
> all part of the conversation between designer and reader.

Source: Library and Information Science Illinois, [How the Page
Matters](http://www.lis.illinois.edu/research/projects/how-page-matters)



# DIGITAL PUBLISHING TOOLKIT {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
June 27, 2013 at 4:19 pm.

*![FlorianCramer](imgs/MG_5572-e1372343511153.jpg)*

*A preliminary proposal for the Digital Publishing Toolkitby Florian
Cramer*

The Toolkit should contain two basic elements. On the one hand a “Howto
Document” as a sort of manual, and on the other a “Software Toolkit”
should be compiled off both existing and self-written utilities.

# 

## **PART 1 – A “HOWTO DOCUMENT”**

**CONTENT**The “Howto Document” should not presuppose any technical
knowledge, but become an “e-publishing DIY for dummies”. It should
become an empowerment document in an accessible language providing
cultural sector publishers the know-how to produce e-publications. For
this reason the manual should be released both as an analog and a
digital publication. The target group of this project are mostly still
in the analog world and this publication should help them to make the
step to the digital world. The readers of the document will be: book
publishers, magazine publishers, writers, editors, artists,
graphic/media designers.

**SCENARIOS:** Several scenarios should give insight in the different
possibilities of e-publishing in relation to different circumstances and
contexts. A proposed set of these scenario’s: visual publications,
research publications, periodicals, new types of publications.

**TECHNOLOGY:** Departing from this introduction a technological
overview of pros and cons of – websites, PDF, mobile apps, EPUB2/mobi,
EPUB3/html5/iBook/KF8 – is needed. But also an overview of the strengths
and limitations and the differences between reader software, reader
hardware and different file formats. This document will be out of date
in a few years, but it is still necessary to create such an overview.

**WORKFLOWS:** The problem that likely needs to be communicated the most
is the change in workflows. As a publisher you cannot work the old way –
using InDesign or other print oriented documents as the departure point
for you e-publication. This shift should be explained per scenario with
an emphasis on practical solutions.

**DISTRIBUTION PLATFORMS:** The Pros and Cons of distribution platforms,
like e-bookstores (Amazon, Apple, Google, Kobo, Sony),  online reading
(Scribd , Issuu…), print-on-demand, pirate platforms (AAAAARG, Monoskop,
PirateBay), artist- / designer-run projects (Badlands, KYUR8,
artistsebooks) also need to be discussed.

**GUIDE: DESIGN  YOUR  OWN  E – PUBLICATION: **Eventually a guide will
be developed that addresses per scenario the change in workflow and
indicate ‘for which part you need what’. Presumably it should focus on
EPUB2/3, with an emphasis on EPUB3. It needs to provide a step – by –
step guide clarifying that publishers need to work from well-structured
sources (not from PDF, InDesign or Word documents, but ideally XML-based
documents or more pragmatically, documents in a lightweight semantic
markup language like
[MultiMarkdown](http://fletcherpenney.net/multimarkdown/)) to a final
publication. It should focus on new, relevant insights: Everything that
is covered elsewhere needs to be left out and addressed by a short
summary. For instance Elizabeth Castro’s book “EPUB straight to the
point” on transforming Word and InDesign documents to EPUB already
addresses the pitfalls of working from InDesign, and this should not be
explained in great depth in this manual. Also the results that are too
case-specific should be left out. Cases where you really need an
external professional should be clearly indicated as such, and skipped
as well.

**FLOWCHARTS:** Each workflow should also be visualized in
easy-to-follow flowcharts for each scenario.

**SUMMARY:** The summary should sum up common pitfalls, technological
shortcomings and new opportunities.

**FUTUROLOGY:** Finally a vision for the future will try to answer
‘Where will we be in 2020..?’ What will the reading technology, the
reading culture, the publishing culture look like, what do we expect the
industry and the market to look like.

**APPENDIX:** This should contain a glossary of technical terms, key
word index, bibliography, and a link list.

**FORM OF THE DOCUMENT** (*We will eat our own dog food!)*The developed
workflows will determine how this publication will be approached: The
source format will be MultiMarkdown and the publishing formats will be:
Website / HTML, EPUB, HTML5 app (?), PDF, print book. Thus developing a
publication for each format based on a well-structured source format.

## **PART 2 – SOFTWARE TOOLKIT **

**CONTENT: **As explained, the software toolkit will exist both of
existing software and self-written software. The existing utilities
should be mainly based on open source tools, but essentially there
should be a detailed overview of tools that are vital and necessary for
e-publishing. This could also include restricted freeware and/or
proprietary tools as long as they have something unique to offer and are
worth the financial investment. With regards to the self-written
software, the emphasis should be on simple, reusable code, small tools
that fix common problems. These should all be in the public domain or
released under an open source license.

**FORM: **The existing software should be referenced within the
workflows, but also separately in the manual with URLs. A list of links
to all these tools should be compiled as a website repository and should
be regularly maintained (for example, twice a year through a student
assistant). The self-written software should be part of this website
repository and the source codes should be included in the published
manual where possible.

**DISTRIBUTION: **The distribution of this “Digital Publishing Toolkit”
should address all possible platforms:  All book stores, all online
reading platforms, all pirate sites, all artist-run sites, our own
website, etc.

**MONETIZATION: **There should be an overview of the most relevant
platforms and systems for payment/compensation. This will not be an
overview of business models, but simply technical information on the
payment systems that are available.

## *[Original presentation file (PDF) here.](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/06/presentation-overview-toolkit.pdf)*



# BiNu’s Worldreader – a reading app for emerging markets {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
June 24, 2013 at 11:13 am.

> The future, as every marketer knows, is in content. But that doesn’t
> just mean video, audio and all the impressive high tech stuff. It also
> means basic amenities like books. In many regions around the world
> there simply isn’t access to reading material. And at the most basic
> level, the abundance of mobile technology facilitates literacy, and
> improves people’s economic potential. “Our colleagues in a rich city
> like Sydney might find it strange,” says Lentell, “but in many
> countries [mobile] is the only way many people would be able to read a
> book.”
>
> Lentell wanted to make it easy for people to access books and so
> developers of biNu built a reading app and populated it with books
> from Project Gutenberg. “When this received a good response we came
> across Worldreader, a not-for-profit based in Barcelona and San
> Francisco, which enables literacy through digital books. Its first
> focus had been getting the Kindle into schools into Africa. However,
> once they were on the ground they realised just how many people had
> phones and how many people would  like to read via this method. We
> gave them our application and now half a million people are reading
> books on the Worldreader app on BiNu. That was a very satisfying
> outcome. But it is just the beginning.”
>
> This March biNu signed a deal with Harlequin Publishers, to make over
> 8700 books, most notably Mills & Boon romance novels, available for
> purchase. “They came to us,” Lentell tells me. This seems an
> incredibly smart move as Mills & Boon has massive appeal in markets
> like India. Now the only thing left is to join the dots. If consumers
> in emerging markets could pay for stuff using this sophisticated
> retail network of mobile pre-payment hawkers perhaps you could make
> everyone happy?
>
> “If all you have is the mobile phone and even if it is a small screen
> you’re as interested as being entertained as anyone else on the
> planet,” Lentell concludes, “this is just the beginning for these
> markets and the desire to consume is as strong as anything we might
> feel. And in a sense it presents an even more interesting market
> because the pent up demand is huge. The challenge is how to deliver
> content, education, knowledge through that one small screen.”

Source: [Underground iTunes: Australian Start-Up Drives Apps Potential
to Emerging
Markets](http://www.idgconnect.com/abstract/2290/underground-itunes-australian-start-up-drives-apps-potential-emerging-markets) by
Kathryn Cave, June 20th 2013



# Digital publications in practice {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
June 23, 2013 at 2:08 pm.

![](imgs/02_Top5SmartphoneOS.png)

![](imgs/01_Top5Vendors.png)

## Jargon, Platforms & Publication Formats

*By Marc de Bruijn and Jorrit Sybesma (PUNTPIXEL)*

First of all this document exists to assist the different parties
directly involved in the RAAK-MKB project “Digital Publishing Toolkit”.
The platforms for which publications may be developed will be introduced
and contextualised in brief, and a preliminary advice for choosing
publication formats is issued.

**CONTENT**[JARGON](#5d6s91ntioq7)[PLATFORMS](#Platforms)

[Personal Computer
(PC)](#7r2fouir5lvf)[Tablet](#l6tacdlw75co)[Smartphones](#tpb8qz7jcs94)[eReaders](#3q2ispek9io8)

[FORMATS](#cjpclzljebw)

[EPUB](#3ip4u83tw8vp) – [Advantages](#367iiwuwf48a) /
[Disadvantages](#93li3idq4bpx)[HPub](#yod1xa3m18aj) –
[Advantages](#Advantages) / [Disadvantages](#dfandkn6fm2c)[Which
format?](#cktdv2veofhr)



# 

# JARGON

Using a fixed set of terms is important in this phase of the project.
Terms like *platform, framework,* etc.

**Platform:** The device on which the digital publication are viewed,
read, and used. This includes eReaders, tablets, smartphones and
personal computers. See: Platforms

**Format:**Formats

**Documentation:** Within the context of the RAAK-MKB project “Digital
Publishing Toolkit” documentation of the development of the digital
publication is an essential factor besides building a framework;
together these two form the proposed toolkit.

**Framework:**

**Toolkit:** According to us, the proposed toolkit within the project
“Digital publishing Toolkit” consists of two components: documentation
and a framework. Both elements will be publicly accessible and available
to third parties.



# PLATFORMS

One of the biggest challenges is the amount of extant platforms, each
with their own limitations. The platforms discussed below are in order
of openness, starting with the ones allowing most freedom, descending to
the more closed options.

## Personal Computer (PC)

The PC (desktop as well as notebooks) allows for the most freedom. One
has access to a web browser and the possibility to install a great range
of applications. For viewing EPUB (.epub) document formats there are
various, mostly free applications. For Macintosh users there is for
example [Calibre](http://calibre-ebook.com) (open source, accessible for
several operating systems), [Adobe Digital
Editions](http://www.adobe.com/nl/products/digital-editions.html)
(Macintosh and Windows)
[Kitabu](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/kitabu/id492498910?mt=12)
(free), [BookReader](http://macbookreader.com) (paid) and
[Nook](http://www.barnesandnoble.com/u/nook-for-mac/379003592) (free).
All these applications are able to open EPUBs, some of them support
multiple document formats and
[DRM](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_rights_management). Adobe
Digital Editions for instance supports interactive PDFs besides EPUB.
Calibre has [an impressive
list](http://manual.calibre-ebook.com/faq.html#what-formats-does-app-support-conversion-to-from)
of supported document formats ((According to the documentation: CBZ,
CBR, CBC, CHM, DJVU, EPUB, FB2, HTML, HTMLZ, LIT, LRF, MOBI, ODT, PDF,
PRC, PDB, PML, RB, RTF, SNB, TCR, TXT, TXTZ)) and can also convert
documents into a limited set ((AZW3, EPUB, FB2, OEB, LIT, LRF, MOBI,
HTMLZ, PDB, PML, RB, PDF, RTF, SNB, TCR, TXT, TXTZ)) of digital
publication formats.

There are also browser extensions for Mozilla Firefox (for example
[EPUBReader](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/epubreader/))
and Google Chrome (for example
[MagicScroll](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/magicscroll-ebook-reader/ghgnmgfdoiplfmhgghbmlphanpfmjble),
[Readium](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/readium/fepbnnnkkadjhjahcafoaglimekefifl))
to view EPUBs.

Another possibility is to leave the separate applications and browser
extensions for what they are and choose a web based EPUB viewer. The
advantage of this kind of web platform is that the material can be
accessed by every (modern) web browser. Examples of these kinds of
platforms are [MagicScroll](http://www.magicscroll.net) ((MagicScroll
offers a browser extension and a web platform.)),
[Aldiko](http://www.aldiko.com) and [Booki.sh](https://booki.sh)
((Booki.sh uses [Monocle](http://monocle.inventivelabs.com.au), an
open-source EPUB viewer developed in Ruby on Rails)). A disadvantage of
these web platforms is that they can terminate their services at any
given moment, examples of this are
[bookworm](http://oreilly.com/bookworm) of O’Reilly Media and [Ibis
Reader](http://ibisreader.com) (bought by [Safari Books
Online](http://www.safaribooksonline.com)).



## Tablet

The tablet-market is dominated by a few big players. As is the case with
the telephone market, there are roughly two main players with their
matching operating systems: Apple with
[iOS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IOS) and Samsung with
[Android](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Android_(operating_system)). The
Android-segment consists of many manufacturers offering similar hardware
with a variant of Android as its operating system. However, Samsung has
the biggest market-share.
(([www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS23772412\#](https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS23772412#.UUw2Pb8WH8s)
)) There exist smaller variants of tablets by manufacturers like Amazon
(Kindle Fire HD) and Barnes & Noble (Nook HD+), these are discussed
under the header [eReaders](#id.ok66hvpvpzwy).

For tablets the situation is comparable to that of the PC, with the
exception of browser extensions.

The web-based EPUB viewers are also available for use with the internet
browser of the tablet. Most browsers use [WebKit](http://www.webkit.org)
(open source) as rendering engine; this means that WebKit is responsible
for generating the visual and functional parts of a page on the web.
Both the tablet and the PC versions of Apple Safari and Google Chrome
use WebKit and [Opera](http://www.opera.com) will also implement WebKit
in favour of their own rendering engine in the near future. The only
other relevant player regarding browsers is Microsoft’s Internet
Explorer. However, Microsoft doesn’t (yet) play an important role on the
tablet-market (in spite of the introduction of Microsoft Surface) and is
mostly dominant within the Windows PC-segment. Internet Explorer uses
the closed-sourced [Trident rendering
engine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trident_(layout_engine))

There are also applications available which can interpret EPUB. For iOS
there are among others
[iBooks](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/ibooks/id364709193?mt=8&ls=1&v0=www-its-ipad-builtinapps-ibooks-us)
((The only application that can read the closed iBooks document
format.)) ,
[Kindle](http://www.amazon.com/gp/feature.html/ref=kcp_ipa_ln_ar?docId=1000490441)
((Amazon uses the same name for both it’s hardware (the Kindle eReaders)
and software in  relation to digital publications)), [Sony
Reader](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/reader-ebooks-from-sony/id566383171),
[Kobo](https://itunes.apple.com/US/app/id301259483?mt=8&ign-mpt=uo%3D4)
and
[NOOK](http://www.barnesandnoble.com/u/nook-for-ipad-iphone-ipod-touch/379003589/).
There are also a few applications which are not directly linked to a
publisher (for instance
[Readmill](https://itunes.apple.com/nl/app/readmill-ebook-reader/id438032664?l=en&mt=8),
[Bluefire
Reader](https://itunes.apple.com/nl/app/bluefire-reader/id394275498?l=en&mt=8)).
Android also has a
[Kindle](http://www.amazon.com/gp/feature.html?ie=UTF8&docId=165849822)
application and
[NOOK](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=bn.ereader&feature=search_result),
[Sony Reader](https://ebookstore.sony.com/rme/) and
[Kobo](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.kobobooks.android&feature=search_result)
are present. Just like on iOS there are also applications of smaller
players, like
[Aldiko](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.aldiko.android&feature=related_apps#?t=W251bGwsMSwxLDEwOSwiY29tLmFsZGlrby5hbmRyb2lkIl0.),
[Moon+
Reader](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.flyersoft.moonreader&feature=search_result),
[FBReader](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.flyersoft.moonreader&feature=search_result)
and [Cool
Reader](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.coolreader&feature=related_apps#?t=W251bGwsMSwxLDEwOSwib3JnLmNvb2xyZWFkZXIiXQ..).

## 



## Smartphones

The situation of smartphones is largely identical to that of tablets.
However, the market is focussed (heavily) on Android ((
[www.businesswire.com/news/home/20130214005415/en/Android-iOS-Combinid](http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20130214005415/en/Android-iOS-Combinid)
)), a trend that is expected within the tablet realm as well. As of
2013, both Android and iOS hold the largest market share
((<http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS24002213#.UUxKAL8WH8t>)).

Most of the applications for tablets are available for smartphones. The
interface is scaled to the smaller size of the telephone – the same is
true for the web-based platforms.



## eReaders

eReaders became widely known by the introduction of [Amazon
Kindle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_Kindle) in 2007. eReaders
differ from tablets in the way that they are only suitable for reading
books, are relatively cheap and have monochrome displays. An important
characteristic of the eReader is the use of “electronic paper”
(e-paper), a so-called electrophoretic screen. “Electronic paper” is
designed to mimic the characteristics of paper as close as possible and
is relatively low on energy consumption.

Both Amazon and Barnes & Noble also offer more expensive models, Kindle
Fire (en Kindle Fire HD) and NOOK Tablet (and NOOK HD+) respectively.
These models are not really eReaders anymore, but fully-fledged, small
sized tablets. These models do not use “e-paper”, but colour [LED
screens with
backlight](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LED-backlit_LCD_display) – a
standard component of tablets like iPad or Galaxy Tab. Mostly these
tablets use a version of the Android operating system as its core, in
contrast to the classic monochromatic eReaders using their own operating
system built on a version of Linux. The Samsung [Galaxy
Note](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samsung_Galaxy_Note_10.1) and Apple
[iPad mini](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPad_Mini) can be seen as an
answer to these smaller sized tablets.

Thus, one cannot speak of a dated generation regarding the black and
white eReaders. The current definition of eReader is a device on which
digital books can be read, and presented on monochromatic “electronic
paper”. The transition to a kind of “e-paper” also capable of rendering
colour has not yet started and it remains questionable if this will
happen soon. At the moment, a very limited set of devices is available
that render colour, like the [JetBook
Color](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ECTACO_jetBook#JetBook_Color) (\$
500,-)
(([www.ectaco.com/jetBook\_Color/](http://www.ectaco.com/jetBook_Color/)
)) and the Hanvon  [WISEreader
C920](http://www.hanvon.com/en/products/ebook/products-c920.html) (± \$
530,-)
(([www.engadget.com/2011/01/09/hanvon-brings-e920-worlds-first-color-e-ink-reader-to-ces-we/](http://www.engadget.com/2011/01/09/hanvon-brings-e920-worlds-first-color-e-ink-reader-to-ces-we/)
)). Both models make use of the
[Triton](http://www.eink.com/display_products_triton.html)[Imaging
Film](http://www.eink.com/display_products_triton.html) of the company E
ink, a technology also present in the monochromatic models of the
Kindle, for example. The reason why big players like Amazon and Barnes &
Noble choose to make LED-backlit screen tablets in favour of “electronic
paper” for their colour versions, is probably due to the high production
costs. Currently there are “conventional” tablets on the market with
more options (apart from reading eBooks), for the same price as a colour
eReader.



# FORMATS

A wide range of document formats to distribute digital publications
exists. Though the question is if these formats are suitable in relation
to the requirements of the publishers involved in the “Digital
Publishing Toolkit” project. For instance, iBooks from Apple, a
closed-source end-format that can be created by using [iBooks
Author](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBooks_Author), is comparable to
EPUB to a certain extend. However, iBooks contains undocumented
technical extensions that can only be interpreted by the iBooks
application for iOS.

Interactive PDF is another end-format that offers interesting
possibilities at first sight. It is possible to implement video and
audio in the PDFs, as well as more common features like annotations and
hyperlinks of pages within a publication. It is also possible to use JavaScript in PDFs,
and this offers – in theory – interesting possibilities for using for
example animations or requesting information from external sources. The
aforementioned possibilities, with exception of annotations and
hyperlinking, only work consistently within Adobe Reader and only in a
limited way, or not at all, in alternatives like [Foxit
Reader](http://www.foxitsoftware.com/Secure_PDF_Reader/)or
[Preview](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preview_(Mac_OS)) for Mac.

It’s best to analyse in further detail the publication formats that are
suitable. Below we discuss two document formats that most likely offer
the best solutions.



## EPUB

The EPUB standard was introduced in 2007 and is now at version 3.0. The
latest update to the standard was in 2011. EPUB itself is based on the
Open eBook Publication Structure (OEBPS) dating from 1999. Management of
the standard is in the hands of the International Digital Publishing
Forum (IDPF). EPUB is nothing more than a compressed package
([ZIP](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ZIP_(file_format))) of documents
(text, audio, video, fonts, scripts, etc.) that can be read on an
eReader.

The [EPUB 3 standard](http://idpf.org/epub/30/spec/epub30-overview.html)
offers the following, main possibilities:

1.  Structural lay-out on basis of HTML5;
2.  Hyperlinking, within the confines of the EPUB;
3.  Support for [MathML](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MathML), a
    language for producing the notation of mathematical formulas;
4.  Scripting the content using JavaScript;
5.  Applying a custom visual style to the publication with the use of
    CSS;
6.  Use of custom fonts (other than the ones present on the viewing
    device);
7.  Embedding audio and video;
8.  Support of
    [SVG](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalable_Vector_Graphics), the
    possibility to apply scalable vector graphics in a digital
    publication;

To a certain extent, producing an EPUB is comparable to developing a
website, the most important difference is that an EPUB is restricted set
of possibilities. Some of those restrictions are imposed by the standard
itself but many of the limitations stem from the lack of support by
various EPUB readers.



### Advantages

-   Wide support of the document format;
-   Document format is based on a standard with a long lifespan;
-   Thorough technical documentation.



### Disadvantages

-   Limited support of the standard by many eReaders, either on the
    basis of technical limitations (monochromatic screen, safety
    considerations), or because another document format is preferred
    (iBooks in the case of Apple);
-   Due to the previously mentioned disadvantage there is limited
    freedom in relation to experimenting with technique and design. A
    magazine-like publication with lots of photographic material in
    EPUB-format seems highly unlikely or at least very difficult to
    produce, at the moment.



## HPub

HPub is not a standard with a central controlling authority, as is the
case with IDPF and EPUB. An HPub is, just like EPUB, a compressed
ZIP-package that contains documents (texts, audio, video, fonts,
scripts, etc.). HPub originates from the open source [Baker
Framework](http://bakerframework.com) for iOS and the derivative [Friar
Framework](http://www.friarframework.com) for Android.

The difference between EPUB and HPub lies not in the document format,
but in the viewer interprets the package and displays the content to the
user. The Baker and Friar Framework offer the code for a basic
application that can be adjusted according to ones own design, and
eventually distributed in the App Store for iOS and Google Play for
Android. The application offers support for downloading multiple
editions in a series and purchasing separate editions through the
payment systems of Apple and Google. The viewer for HPub uses WebKit to
present its content.

Why would one choose HPub? The format offers complete freedom in
defining the structure of your publication, because you are not limited
by an official standard. HPub could be a possible file format when
publishing a magazine (see [Aside](http://asidemag.com), which uses its
[own framework](http://grid.asidemag.com) for the lay-out structure) or
a strongly visually oriented publication.



### Advantages

-   Complete freedom in defining the publication structure;
-   All technical possibilities of the web are available;
-   Familiar development environment for web developers, as it’s in
    essence a small website compiled into a ZIP-package.
-   Publication is also accessible by web browser.



### Disadvantages

-   Not an official standard;
-   Maintenance and costs of the viewer application;
-   Little documentation;
-   Only available for two platforms;
-   No support by eReaders.

## MOBI/AZW/AZW3 (KF8)

AZW, a third, closed format is more like a collection of formats,
distributed by Amazon for its Kindle eReaders. Initially digital
publications based on Mobipocket/Mobi were offered. This standard is
derived from the Open eBook format, just like EPUB, and has been on the
market from 2000 and onwards. The company responsible for the format
(the French Mobipocket SA) was bought by Amazon in 2005, which
subsequently introduced the Mobi-format with certain adjustments and
limitations (AZW ((<http://wiki.mobileread.com/wiki/AZW> )) ) for the
first generation Kindle. Amazon introduced yet another standard for its
eReaders with the introduction of Kindle Fire in 2011. This [model
KF8](http://www.amazon.com/gp/feature.html?docId=1000729511), or AZW3
((<http://wiki.mobileread.com/wiki/KF8>)), has EPUB 3.0 as its basis,
still uses the document extension .azw and also incorporates HTML5 and
CSS3, both important parts of EPUB3.0. It is still possible to read the
older documents with the Mobi-structure with Kindle Fire.

To use EPUBs on a Kindle device they should be converted by the program
[KindleGen](http://www.amazon.com/gp/feature.html?ie=UTF8&docId=1000765211)
(for Mac OS X, Linux and Windows), produced by Amazon. What is left of
the specific technical qualities of the EPUB after conversion to
AZW/AZW3 is difficult to assess.



## What format?

The most important question right now is which publication format fits
the wishes of the publisher best. Together with publisher Valiz we’ve
decided to produce a dummy publication of about ten pages in which the
different technical possibilities of the different formats are
presented.

Initially our intention is to develop this dummy publication according
to the guidelines of EPUB 3.0, using the full potential of the standard,
disregarding the (technical) limitations of the applications on
different platforms. However, the third format AZW should be taken into
account, considering the (growing) market share of Amazon. Is it for
instance possible to convert EPUB to KF8 in a reliable way, and is
Mobipocket still a relevant format?

The EPUB dummy is intended to be the starting point for further
development or a turning point where we might need to consider
alternative formats like HPub.



# Crash Test Dummy {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Marc de
Bruijn](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/marcdebruijn/ "Posts by Marc de Bruijn"),
June 20, 2013 at 11:18 am.

In order to test the capabilities of the various EPUB readers we created
a dummy EPUB containing a couple of features often requested by
designers and publishers. While EPUB 3 is a modern standard with a lot
of possibilities, the utilisation of a relatively simple design and the
inclusion of rich media is seriously hampered by the limitations of the
EPUB readers. Most readers place restrictions on style and content,
often showing a mangled version of the original or something wholly
different. As such there is no uniform way in which EPUB is interpreted
by readers and the situation is more or less comparable to developing
websites a few years ago, and having to support older iterations of
Internet Explorer (notably version 6) by resorting to ugly hacks (the
lack alpha transparency in PNG images
((<http://support.microsoft.com/kb/294714>, more wonderful quirks here:
<http://www.positioniseverything.net/explorer.html>)) comes to mind, for
example) or opting out of certain technical innovations. The situation
regarding EPUB interpretation is more or less the same – viz. faulty
support of the standard by major EPUB readers. ((See:
<http://www.bisg.org/docs/BISG_EPUB3PlatformGrid.xls> for a detailed
comparison.)) The landscape is even more fragmented, however, there are
a great many EPUB readers for various platforms out there compared to
the relatively small amount of browsers (courtesy of three major players
((Internet Explorer (Microsoft), Firefox (Mozilla) and Safari
(Apple).))) a developer had to support.

 

## About the Dummy EPUB

We started out rather traditionally by creating an initial design in
Adobe Illustrator, containing various ideas partly based on the wishlist
of one of the publishers we work for (Valiz).

The ideas consist of the following:

1.  The content is divided into two sections, a normal text section and
    a black one containing related content (images, notes, other media,
    etc.) The user may slide the black section into view by
    tapping/clicking on an image or footnote. From a technical
    standpoint this requires some JavaScript animation and CSS styling.
    For convenience sake this point will be referred to in our test
    results and tables simply as *“JavaScript”*.
2.  The text section has a left margin containing notes, images and
    quotes from related publications. For this to work a reader has to
    support more complex CSS styles, as opposed to styling or colouring
    text – appears in test results and tables as *“Complex Styles”*;
3.  Multiple custom typefaces (test results and tables: *“Fonts”*);
4.  Coloured text elements and blocks, text styles (*“Basic Styles”*);
5.  The inclusion of video and audio;



![](imgs/05.jpg)
The top section of the original, static design in Adobe Illustrator.



The static Illustrator design was then converted into an HTML page
adhering to the EPUB 3 standard. After some initial tests in various
EPUB readers and finding that support for JavaScript isn’t widespread
for example, we decided to simplify the design by eliminating the two
section layout – we aim to implement a variation of this concept at a
later date, however. The JavaScript in the dummy EPUB consists of two
simple scripts, one animating images and another toggling the stack
order of an element.

Some additional images of the design [can be found
here](https://plus.google.com/photos/113897703800209573412/albums/5891201595830168561?authkey=CKj5zZvJ7dvElQE).

The EPUB we prepared contains custom fonts,
[Neuton](http://www.google.com/fonts/specimen/Neuton) and
[Lato](http://www.google.com/fonts/specimen/Lato), both released under
the SIL Open Font License (OFL), offering multiple weights and styles
and suitable for use with the CSS3 @font-face rule. Also contained
within the EPUB are sound and video samples MP3/OGG and MP4/WebM
((Consistent video playback might be helped by including the OGG/Vorbis
video format.)) format respectively. CSS styling is applied to the whole
document, ranging from simple styling (headers, coloured blocks, bolds
and italics, etc.) to more complex positioning of images and notes in
the margin.



![](imgs/Chrome01.png)
The HTML portion of the EPUB as rendered by Google Chrome.



Lastly, the document contains endnotes as per the IDPF [accessibility
guidelines](http://www.idpf.org/accessibility/guidelines/content/xhtml/notes.php)
regarding notes. Footnotes are also mentioned in these guidelines, but
as most EPUB readers forgo with displaying the traditional page
structure the inclusion of footnotes might not be a very viable
strategy. Unfortunately endnotes do not seem to work correctly in the
EPUB we prepared, we’re not certain if this is due to a syntactical
error on our part or lack of support by EPUB readers – this is something
we intend to investigate further in the future.

We tested our dummy EPUB on several platforms (desktop, tablet and
smartphone), making sure to include the major EPUB readers of the
respective platforms. A complete collection of application screenshots
[can be found on
Google+](https://plus.google.com/photos/113897703800209573412/albums/5890421128762040017?authkey=CP_w1-Hlg4ufyAE).

The EPUB itself [is hosted
here](https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B1ynUAxdZ4oUMnAzRTU1UDNIaTg/edit?usp=sharing).
Below is a screenshot of Google Chrome showing what the first part of
the EPUB should look like.

 

## On the desktop (Mac)

The desktop/notebook is probably not the most popular platform to peruse
ebooks, as it doesn’t have the portability of a tablet or smartphone.
There exist some applications for this platform, notably Kindle. iBooks
[is also being ported](http://www.apple.com/osx/preview/#ibooks) to the
bigger screen.

### Kindle

*Developer:* Amazon*Version:* 1.10.3*Website:*
<http://www.amazon.com/gp/feature.html?ie=UTF8&docId=1000464931>



![](imgs/Amazon02.png)
Kindle for Mac



Kindle of course doesn’t support EPUB, so the document has to be
converted to an AZW3 file – this process is rather trivial and can be
done by Calibre. ((Calibre seems to strip audio and video, for some
reason. So another method of conversion (with KindleGen, for example)
might be worth investigating.)) Support for anything more than images is
seriously lacking. No styling (CSS is simply not parsed), video and
audio do not work and fonts are overridden. This all wouldn’t be a
problem if Kindle wasn’t one of the biggest ebook platforms in the
world.

### Calibre

*Developer:* Kovid Goyal*Version:* 0.9.35*Website:*
<http://calibre-ebook.com>



![](imgs/Calibre01.png)
Calibre



The cross platform solution for Linux, Mac and Windows. Due to its open
source nature it characteristically supports an impressive range of
features and functionality – managing an ebook library and exporting to
different ebook formats is also possible with Calibre. The EPUB viewer
is rather slow, it takes several seconds to load an EPUB, and has CSS
isn’t fully supported it seems, bolder or lighter variations of the font
are not displayed, for example.

### Adobe Digital Editions

*Developer:* Adobe*Version:* 2.0.6*Website:*
<http://www.adobe.com/products/digital-editions.html>



![](imgs/Adobe-Digital-Editions02.png)
Adobe Digital Editions



Adobe Digital Editions is comparable with Kindle regarding the lack
support for various EPUB features. The application accepts EPUB, but
strips it of anything except images.

### Kitabu

*Developer:* Sixty Four*Version:* 1.0.7*Website:*
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Kitabu/242717922467492>



![](imgs/Kitabu02.png)
Kitabu



A very simple, free EPUB reader. Fonts and most styling are overridden
and the application insists on dividing the content into columns. This
may be disabled by the user, though the application still retains the
concept of pagination at all times, this differs from other readers like
Ehon or Kindle.

### Ehon

*Developer:* Pierre Oleo*Version:* 1.0.1*Website:* <http://ehonapp.com>



![](imgs/Ehon02.png)
Ehon



This application is relatively unknown and isn’t actively developed, it
seems. Probably some version of WebKit is used for rendering the ePub,
hence the full support for all the features of the publication.

### Azardi

*Developer:* Infogrid Pacific*Version:* 20.0*Website:*
<http://azardi.infogridpacific.com>



![](imgs/Azardi02.png)
Azardi



Despite the very awkward interface, Azardi renders the EPUB reasonably
well. No support for custom fonts and the structure is slightly mangled
due to the application’s insistence on displaying facing pages.
JavaScript support is present and audio and video work.

 

## On tablets and smartphones

Most of the applications mentioned below are available for both tablets
and smartphones. The differences between EPUB display on tablets and
smartphones are rather trivial. Of course the screen sizes of
smartphones are significantly smaller, but in terms of technical
possibilities (or lack thereof) both platforms are the same.

### iBooks

*Developer:* Apple*Version:* 3.1*Website:*
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/id364709193>*Environment:* iOS



![](imgs/iBooks02.png)
iBooks



The EPUB support of iBooks is a pleasant surprise. Custom fonts work as
does the CSS styling and JavaScript. Unfortunately everything in the
application is wrapped in the skeuomorphic GUI which clashes rather
violently on a visual level. The amount of space devoted to the actual
content is relatively small as the book margins are defined by the
application, not the EPUB.

### Kindle

*Developer:* AMZN Mobile*Version:* 3.8*Website:*
<http://www.amazon.com/gp/feature.html?ie=UTF8&docId=1000301301>*Environment:*
iOS, Android



![](imgs/KindleiOS02.png)
Kindle on iOS



The experience is roughly comparable to the desktop version of the
application. Content is divided into two columns here, no styling or
custom fonts. Audio and video were stripped during the conversion by
Calibre.

### Bluefire Reader

*Developer:* Bluefire Productions*Version:* 1.9.7*Website:*
<http://www.bluefirereader.com>*Environment:* iOS



![](imgs/Bluefire-Reader02.png)
Bluefire Reader



Bluefire renders the EPUB as expected from most tablet readers, no
styling or media.

### Readmill

*Developer:* Readmill Network*Version:* 3.2*Website:*
<https://readmill.com>*Environment:* iOS



![](imgs/Readmill02.png)
Readmill



This application doesn’t allow to load EPUB files directly and instead
requires the user to upload files (PDF or EPUB) to their personal
library which can then be synced across other devices. Readmill’s
website proudly touts a focus on design and typography, which in
practice means that any CSS styling in an EPUB is ignored and the
Readmill ebook styles are applied to the entirety of the document.

### Kobo Books

*Developer:* Kobo*Version:* 5.12*Website:*
<http://www.kobo.com/apps>*Environment:* iOS, Android



![](imgs/Kobo02.png)
Kobo Books



It’s telling that Kobo Books is a pleasant surprise, although it mangles
several aspects of the design and doesn’t display the custom typography,
it’s because the other readers are just really bad at interpreting
anything more than simple text and displaying imagery.

### Lektz

*Developer:* AEL Data Services*Version:* 3.1*Website:*
<http://lektz.com>*Environment:* iOS, Android



![](imgs/Lektz02.png)
Lektz



This reader is one of the applications to (at least partly) implement
the Readium SDK. Readium is a non profit organisations backed by the
IDPF and several partners aiming to develop a cross-platform SDK for
developers. In practice this means Readium provides the interpreter for
EPUBs on various platforms, including the web. Partners include Sony,
Kobo and three large French publishing houses (Gallimard, La Martinière
and Flammarion). Support of large commercial parties is vital for the
emergence of Readium as a standard SDK for EPUB readers, so the initial
roster of backers is a good start. Lektz supports all features of the
dummy EPUB, except for audio and video.

### Aldiko Book Reader

![](imgs/Aldiko02.png)

*Developer:* Aldiko*Version:* 2.2.3*Website:*
<http://www.aldiko.com>*Environment:* Android

Barebones presentation of text and images. No video, audio or any
styling.

 

### ePub Reader

![](imgs/ePub-Reader02.png)

*Developer:* Graphilos Studio*Version:* 1.5.3*Website:*
<http://www.graphilos.com>*Environment:* Android

The “best” of the Android applications in terms of CSS styling. However,
all the pages seem to exceed the available screen size.

 

### Mantano Reader Lite

![](imgs/Mantano02.png)

*Developer:* Mantano SAS*Version:* 1.2.9*Website:*
<http://www.mantano.com>*Environment:* Android

Presentation quite similar to Aldiko: just text and images, no video,
audio or styling (except font sizes).

 

### Moon+ Reader

![](imgs/Moon02.png)

*Developer:* Moon+*Version:* 1.9.7.0*Website:*
<http://www.moondownload.com>*Environment:* Android

Moon+ applies its own styling to the background of the publication and
ignores any CSS styling (except for texts that are defined as bold or
italic). No support for video or audio.

 

### Universal Book Reader

![](imgs/UBReader02.png)

*Developer:* Mobile Systems*Version:* 2.1.260*Website:*
<http://www.ubreader.com>*Environment:* Android

No CSS styling (font sizes excepted) or custom fonts. No support for
video or audio.

 

## Summary

The lack of support for the more advanced features of EPUB 3 on tablets
and smartphones is worrying, in our opinion. The lack of any real
support hampers the production of media rich publications and any
efforts regarding (visual) design. At the moment, any innovations,
technical or otherwise, will only be usable or visible in a very small
subset of applications which aren’t widely used nor connected to viable
commercial outlets (Amazon Bookstore, Apple App Store, etc.)

## So… What now?

After surveying the field of current EPUB readers we may conclude that
the impossibilities surpass the possibilities when it comes to the EPUB
3 standard at the moment. The efforts of the Readium foundation are a
good sign for the future, especially because the foundation is backed by
commercial vendors and publishers. Apple’s iBooks might even become a
rather good EPUB reader, but only if the GUI is significantly less in
the way of the content in coming iterations of the application –
hopefully the release iOS 7 will introduce those changes. Amazon’s
Kindle is a bigger problem, as they insist on using their own file
format (KF8/AZW) and the lack of support in our tests on both iPad and
desktop. The AZW format merits further investigation though, as KF8/AZW
is commonly referred to as a wrapper format of EPUB 3, so some of the
features (fonts, basic styles, video, audio, etc.) should be supported.
We intend to prepare some further tests regarding the conversion of EPUB
3 to KF8/AZW and interpretation of the resulting files in various
versions of Kindle.

In relation to the Digital Publishing Toolkit project we’ve decided,
together with Valiz Publishers, to produce two EPUBs based on a printed
entry from Valiz’ “Context Without Walls” series.

The first version is a “conventional” EPUB, utilising only the features
supported by the broadest range of readers. This version will be
distributed through the common commercial channels (Amazon Bookstore,
App Store Books, etc.)

The second version is the “EPUB of the future”, which can only be
perused in conjunction with readers that fully implement the EPUB 3
standard. As such readers are scarce and relatively unpopular compared
to the applications provided by larger commercial parties (Apple,
Amazon, Sony, etc.), we also aim to use one of the libraries offered by
Readium – probably Readium.js – to present the EPUB to a larger
audience.



# E-Reader According to the Oxford English Dictionary {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
June 13, 2013 at 2:48 pm.

The Oxford English Dictionary recently included the word *e-reader* with
the following meanings:

> It can denote a person who reads electronic texts (this sense dates
> from 1995) or a hand-held electronic device used for reading e-books
> or other text in digital form (1999).

Source:
<http://blog.oxforddictionaries.com/2013/06/oed-june-2013-update/>



# EPUB3: One File, Many Ebooks {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
June 3, 2013 at 5:42 pm.

> A single EPUB3 file can be used to create an ebook for all e-readers,
> explained Liz Castro, tech expert and author, at the IDPF conference
> in New York. […] Hachette’s practice of delivering the same EPUB3 file
> to all its e-tailers, including Amazon, sets a precedent for the
> industry, said Castro. If more publishers developed a single viable
> ebook file, would e-reader systems converge upon a single standard for
> rendering that file? And in turn, make ebooks a more intelligible
> medium for the reader?

Source: [“EPUB3: One File, Many
Ebooks”](http://www.digitalbookworld.com/2013/epub3-one-file-many-ebooks/)
by Deanna Utroske.



# Buy on Amazon, Read on Kobo and Viceversa {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
June 3, 2013 at 5:52 pm.

> A problem that finally seems to be taken seriously, now Neelie Kroes
> expressed she supports a study of the EIBF (European and International
> Booksellers Federation), which states that there are too many
> different devices and file formats in Europe (but just as good
> elsewhere), which gets in the way of the development of e-book sales,
> and recognizes that this diversity of systems makes e-books
> non-interchangeable. Consumers who have purchased e-books from Amazon,
> cannot transfer them to their Kobo reader (for instance when they have
> decided to continue their digital future with them), and vice versa.
> Or consumers who have purchased e-books from the iBookstore, cannot
> transfer them to their Sony Reader (although the reverse is possible
> in The Netherlands). The study states that every consumer should
> always be able to transfer its collection of digital books to another
> retailer. In other words: you should be able to export and import your
> e-book collection. For now, this is not in the interest of the large
> gardens with high walls (the ecosystems that listen to names as
> Amazon, Apple, Kobo and Nook), but in those of the consumer. But I
> dare to say it should be in interest of the retailers as well, which
> at this moment try their best to keep the customer within their walls.
> Because if e-books do become interchangeable, more people would start
> to read digitally than currently is the case.

Source: [From format war to sustainability
fight](http://www.futurebook.net/content/format-war-sustainability-fight)
by Timo Boezeman, May 30th 2013.



# Project Descriptions: Hands-on research into the preconditions of digital publishing. {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
May 30, 2013 at 1:28 pm.

*Each subgroup, consisting of a publisher, designer and developer has
formulated their own research project within the bigger framework of the
Digital Publishing Toolkit research program, and will be based on one or
more publications of the publisher. The overall focus is on pragmatic
solutions for digital publishers within the art and culture sector. The
experiences of these hands-on projects will eventually be collected in a
‘Digital Publishing Toolkit’, giving insight into the preconditions of
digital publishing, providing open-source tools where possible, and
allowing publishers of the arts and culture sector to navigate this
diverse and complex landscape of digital publishing in a more grounded
way.*

**** ****

The **subgroup Valiz** is working on the publication *Context Without
Walls*. This new series is a collaboration between Daphne Pappers and
Valiz. Within this series intercontinental contemporary art will be
discussed in relation to philosophical, anthropological, political and
art historical notions. The series will exist of eight separate parts,
and is created initially for printed publication. However, for this
project Valiz, Puntpixel and Meeus Ontwerpt will digitize the series.

The goal of this project is to publish the first two parts of the series
as an e-book, and to develop a digitization manual for the series
overall. The digital publication must go beyond the PDF versions of the
print documents. The publisher and designers want to add elements that
complement the current content. For instance hyperlinks (between books
of the series and within the books themselves), searchable corpora,
complementary content through for example images, sound and/or video
material. From a designer perspective it is important that the analog
design, created by Meeus Ontwerpt, will get a digital equivalent.
Central to this is translating the relation between the text and the
image section of the analog publication to a digital version in such a
way that the design is still recognizable, but also relates to the new
medium.

 

The **subgroup BIS publishers** is working on two publications. *Think
like a Lawyer, Don’t Act Like One* is a popular printed publication in
America. The e-book version will focus on keeping absolute control over
the design, with a fixed format, own font and the left and right pages
relation fixed. Especially this last part is tricky in relation to the
diversity of aspect ratios of the different devices you have to deal
with in relation to digital publishing. Therefore the publication will
be limited to an ePub/Kindle format. Research into the different formats
and devices you have to take into account when designing and/or
developing for digital publishing was part of this publication
trajectory.

More complex publications to digitize are the two product design books,
*Sketching*, and *Sketching The Basics*, written by Koos Eissen and
Roselien Steur, both connected to TU Delft Faculty of Industrial Design
Engineering and the Hogeschool of Amsterdam, product design. The books
have a large international reach and are used in design courses all over
the world. The goal of this project is to translate the books into an
interactive and media rich educational publication that is accessible on
multiple devices. Moreover, the team wants to get insight into what
interactive elements give added value to a digital educational book. For
instance, an in-app sketchbook, social elements, video, layered images
etc, and how this relates to the wishes and experiences of the user.

Through these two cases hands-on insight into the problematics of
digital publishing will be given – this is not only complex because of
the limited availability of technique (formats like ePub, Html 5, etc.),
but also because of the different ecosystems that surround these
publishing formats.

**** ****

The **subgroup of nai010 Publishers** is also working on two
publications. On the one hand a digital publication for the Stedelijk
Museum of Amsterdam that is based on the printed publication
*Highlights*, a collection of high-end artworks, will be developed. The
starting point for this digital publication is the idea that visits to
the Stedelijk, through the use of a digital publication, can be
prepared, deepened and afterwards ‘taken along’. The research will focus
on the idea of ‘highlights’ as a collection of ‘high-end artworks with
commentary’ – which can be deconstructed in an iTunes-like structure of
mini-publications on one high-end artwork – which can be combined into
sets of mini-publications: personal favorites, ‘curated’ collections
etc. From a developers point of view, the user-scenarios are an
important part of the research.

The other digital publication will be developed for the Glasmuseum in
Leerdam – an exhibition about E.H. Haeckel. His work is based on
systematically cataloging and classifying subterranean living species,
in beautiful drawings or glass sculptures. Therefore this project allows
to approach digital publishing from a database-like perspective: On the
one hand it looks into the opportunities digital publishing can give for
adding navigation layers and how this can correlate with different
reader groups, also design wise. And on the other hand how, from a
developer’s perspective, the digital material can be reused within the
same publication, limiting file-size.

****The **INC subgroup** will look into the concept of ‘*The Book as
Directory*’. Here the book is no longer distributed in one format, but
is presented in all its possible formats – from which the user can
choose the format wanted and/or the format that is suitable for the
device used. Central to this research is to get a better insight into
the workflow of developing digital publications that move beyond putting
the print PDF online, and how INC should change their print-oriented
workflow to be able to create digital publications for themselves. It
will examine digital publication formats and their implications in the
workflow and production process, and the changing ways in which *The
Book as Directory* will serve the interests of publisher, author,
distributor and reader. The *Unlike Us Reader* will be used as a
test-case. This research will be complemented with a research into the
systematic use of metadata and document management, and the role it
plays within digital publishing workflows.



# The Book as Directory {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
May 29, 2013 at 10:39 am.

*[Originally posted on
[Doppiozero](http://www.doppiozero.com/materiali/web-analysis/quando-il-lettore-diventa-utente)
with the title “Quando il lettore diventa utente”]*



![](imgs/Inside_the_Kindle_3.jpg)
The Inside of a Kindle 3. Source:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Inside\_the\_Kindle\_3.jpg



The debate
around the \*future\* of publishing never lost momentum. For decades
writers, publishers, programmers and designers have been discussing the
revolutionary possibilities of the electronic book in terms of rich
media, non-linearity and augmentation. The iPad just gave a new boost to
the topic. In the meantime, the dream of an immersive reading experience
in a digital environment came true thanks to the Kindle and e-readers in
general. While much of the attention is directed toward those
content-oriented opportunities concerning modes of fruition and media
enrichment, the context of digital publishing is going under profound
modifications that affect the very definition of reading and the way the
reader relates tothe book as both cultural object and commodity.

In the context of digital publishing the \*future\* is here today (a
good reason to stop talking about \*future\*), but it’s not evident. It
doesn’t blatantly resemble science fiction. On the contrary, it
manifests itself through slight shifts in habit and perception of things
rather than in sensational technologic disruptions. Those shifts easily
become invisible as part of the daily routine. Jaron Lanier would say
they become
[lock-in](http://www.jaronlanier.com/gadgetwebresources.html). That’s
why it’s a good idea to focus more on the context than the content
before some of those concepts become ineradicable part of our common
perspective on books.

E-books are “real” not only from the technical point of view: [In 2012
A](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-19148146)[mazon declared
that](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-19148146)[it](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-19148146)[currently
sells more ebooks than hardbacks and paperbacks
combined.](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-19148146) However the
phenomenon shouldn’t be read only as a technological achievement that
made its way to the market. E-books and e-readers are only the tip of
the iceberg: they are accompanied and supported by a new overall
arrangement of the publishing model and infrastructure.

In fact every big player (Amazon, Google, Apple) on the market is
promoting its own publishing ecosystem. In doing so distributing
platforms are gaining power, overcoming both the publishing houses and
the authors. [When the book becomes a
service](http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/2007/11/17/the-future-of-reading.html),
the influence of the ecosystem doesn’t stop after the purchase, but
propagate to the act of reading through the reading device. Books also
become computers: machines that are not simply able to render ebook
files but actual [mobile
technologies](http://wiki.diffandrep.org/kindle-labor-of-reading),
constantly connected to the cloud. While using the Kindle, all the
highlights (along with all complete list of reading activities) are
remotely stored trough a \*silent\* process called
[W](http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html/ref=hp_left_sib?ie=UTF8&nodeId=200375890)[h](http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html/ref=hp_left_sib?ie=UTF8&nodeId=200375890)[i](http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html/ref=hp_left_sib?ie=UTF8&nodeId=200375890)[spersync](http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html/ref=hp_left_sib?ie=UTF8&nodeId=200375890).
Of course the absence of any evidence of those processes is meant not to
break the immersion into the reading activity. But when an huge amount
of data is collected ceaselessly, reading can no longer be considered a
private and autonomous act. Therefore it seems appropriate to speak of
*user* rather than *reader*, as the person who uses an e-reader
interacts with a complex system and performs, consciously or not, a
complex and networked series of operations.

The contextual changes in publishing also determine the meaning of
ownership regarding books: if you think of the book as a service it
makes sense to buy it twice when you want both the digital and the
physical version. A Kindle user can’t read the books he purchased on
other e-readers (as [Cory Doctorow puts
it](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nZFg-uq5zBA&feature=youtube_gdata_player),
it’s like buying a lightbulb from Walmart and be required to use it on a
Walmart lamp). Those books are encrypted: they are bound to a personal
profile and they can’t be duplicated. Ultimately Amazon has the power to
[remotely
delete](http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/18/technology/companies/18amazon.html?_r=0)
a book from the device.

Big distributors are influencing the reader’s behavior and mindset: as
an example, the Kindle app for desktop computers doesn’t allow
copy-paste. The lack of this feature, clearly against the intrinsic
tendency of the medium, is supposedly a market-driven choice: the
e-books that sell the most are fiction, and it is generally thought that
readers don’t need to copy-paste much from a fiction book. In return
they’re allowed to share passages on Facebook and Twitter. The service
offered by the big players, inevitably conditioned by a commercial
logic, not only determines a purchase process, but a usage pattern. And
the application of a usage pattern to the book corresponds to the
instillation of a cultural model.

Currently the ones that are taking the biggest advantage of new
technologies are neither the readers nor the authors, but the
distributors. So, what can the books’ producers do in order to oppose to
the

As [Project Gutenberg](http://www.gutenberg.org/) taught us, providing
the reader with a set of different tools for different uses of the same
content is already a revolutionary act. Different tools means different
formats and of course the main one would be ePub: an open, easy-to-tweak
format, the contents of which are not crystallized into a fixed layout
for a particular device. Either from ePub itself or from the various
development phases, it is possible to obtain a number of different
formats meant for different aims: plain text for general use, HTML for
online reading and, of course, PDF for print.

Rather than the book as a service, I like to think to the book as
directory: simply a .zip file containing all these different formats,
possibly provided by the publishing houses or the authors themselves
through their own websites. The book, not bound anymore to a software, a
device, a platform or a company, will then be easily read, annotated,
copy-pasted, shared and reworked. The book will return to be a
user-oriented technology.

– Silvio Lorusso ([@silvi0l0russo](https://twitter.com/silvi0L0russo))



# Notes on EPUB Development in Adobe inDesign CS6 {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
May 21, 2013 at 9:16 am.



Version: 0.1 – May 11th, 2013



### Abstract

These notes focus on the ways an InDesign CS6 file should be arranged in
order to be appropriately exported as ePub. Further insights are
provided in order to improve quality of the exported ePub in terms of
file size, metadata, layout.

### Required Knowledge

-   Adobe InDesign CS6
-   Basic HTML and CSS



## [1: Premises

### [1.1: Legend

-   Software Command
-   Shortcut
-   Code Snippet

### [1.2: Wait, weren’t we supposed to use open source tools?

We all love opes source, but in some cases a pragmatic approach it’s
needed: a perspective that takes into account the actual workflow
without denying it beforehand. Not every designer would be happy to give
up the softwares used for the last five years for the sake of open
source.

Developing an EPUB through InDesign could be considered a transitional
process, in doing so the designer will anyway acquire a know-how that
could be invested in open source tools and procedures.

### [1.3: So you’re saying that obtaining EPUB from Indesign is not necessarily the best practice…

Exactly, it really depends on the context. This procedure could be
useful whether:

-   you, or your collaborators, don’t have any HTML or CSS knowledge
    (but in this case you won’t be able to go through the whole tutorial
    and this will heavily impact the quality of your final ePub, check
    [1.4](#1-4));
-   you have an articulated publication already set as an InDesign file;
-   you want to convert your backlist to ePub and the books are archived
    as InDesign packages.

### [1.4: Is Indesign enough to develop a high quality ePub?](#toc-1-4) {#1-4}

No, it’s not enough. There are strong limitations for ePub development
within InDesign, this is because its primary function is to set files
for print.

Therefore if you want a high quality ePub you need to tweak the code
produced by the software, in order to do so you will need HTML and CSS
skills.

### [1.5: May I use the same structure of the InDesign file for both print and ePub?](#toc-1-5) {#1-5}

Rarely the InDesign file ready for print will work fine to be exported
“as is” to ePub. But in case you want to produce an ePub version of the
printed ducument, setting the file as follows will save you a lot of
work. In this sense this tutorial proposes an ePub-first approach.

### [1.6: Resources](#toc-1-6) {#1-6}

-   “InDesign CS6 to EPUB, Kindle, and iPad” course by Anne-Marie
    Concepcion on
    [Lynda.com](http://www.lynda.com/EPUB-tutorials/InDesign-CS6-EPUB-Kindle-iPad/98834-2.html);
-   [*La pratica
    dell’ePub*](http://www.apogeonline.com/libri/9788850314126/scheda)
    (*The ePub Practice*) by Ivan Rachieli, 2011;
-   [Open Packaging Format (OPF) 2.0.1 v1.0.1 Recommended
    Specification](http://www.idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPF_2.0.1_draft.htm).

### [1.7: Softwares](#toc-1-7) {#1-7}

-   [Adobe InDesign
    CS6](https://creative.adobe.com/apps?trial=IDSN&promoid=JZXRC)
-   [EpubCheck](https://code.google.com/p/epubcheck/)
-   [EPUB zip/unzip
    apps](http://www.mobileread.com/forums/showpost.php?p=1181614&postcount=18)
-   [Calibre](http://calibre-ebook.com/)
-   [Adobe Digital
    Editions](http://www.adobe.com/it/products/digital-editions.html)

### [1.8: Attachments](#toc-1-8) {#1-8}

-   [InDesign package with example
    content](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/05/package.zip)
-   [CSS file to be included when exporting the ePub via
    InDesign](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2013/05/unlike-us-reader.css),
    check [9.4](#9-4)
-   [ePub
    example](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/10/unlike-us-reader.epub)

## [2: General](#toc-2) {#2}

### [2.1: No Local Overrides!](#toc-2-1) {#2-1}

This simply means that you should set everything in your document either
as a Paragraph Style or a Charachter Style. When you have set one of those and
change a setting locally a plus sign (+) appears next to the name of the
syle. You should avoid this because it would heavily affect the
cleanness of the ePub code.

[More
info](http://help.adobe.com/en_US/indesign/cs/using/WS9D351498-DAAC-4be1-B4B8-2B6C72FF6CEDa.html)



![](imgs/1.png)
The Paragraph Styles panel



### 2.2: Use Master Pages

Keep all the repeating elements such as title, page number, article
title in Master pages. In this way they won’t be
rendered in the ePub.

[More
info](http://help.adobe.com/en_US/indesign/cs/using/WSa285fff53dea4f8617383751001ea8cb3f-7105a.html)



![](imgs/2.png)
Example of master page



### [2.3: Paragraph Means Paragraph](#toc-2-3) {#2-3}

Don’t use paragraph breaks to space elements, use instead the bounding
box itself.



![](imgs/3.png)
Wrong use of paragraphs





![](imgs/4.png)
Correct use of paragraphs



### [2.4: Paragraph Really Means Paragraph](#toc-2-4) {#2-4}

Use the Space After feature in the Paragraph Style instead of a double paragraph break,
except in the case of colophon and exceptional layouts.



![](imgs/5.png)
Paragraphs spaced via Space After



### [2.5: Paragraph = Paragraph](#toc-2-5) {#2-5}

Use soft returns (Shift+Return) instead of
paragraph breaks (Return) when you work on the
visual appearance of text. A paragraph break could cause problems in a
reflowable context, while the soft returns could be automatically
stripped out when exporting.

[More
info](http://help.adobe.com/en_US/indesign/cs/using/WSa285fff53dea4f8617383751001ea8cb3f-6f77a.html)



![](imgs/6.png)
Soft returns used to break the title for visual purposes.



### [2.6: ALL CAPS hide Actual Caps](#toc-2-6) {#2-6}

Even if you have an ALL CAPS setting remember to use Capitals when you
write the text: it may happen that in the ePub version the setting is
ignored, the result would be for instance a lowercase title.

### [2.7: Letters Aren’t Meant to be Stretched](#toc-2-7) {#2-7}

Do not use Vertical Scale to adjust the
paragraphs (for instance when you have a single word going to the next
line), use instead the Justification settings in
the Paragraph Style.



![](imgs/7.png)
Vertical Scale setting





![](imgs/8.png)
Justification settings in the Paragraph Style



### [2.8: Fonts](#toc-2-8) {#2-8}

Embed a font only if you consider it necessary. On some devices only the
headings’ fonts will be preserved. Also, only the fonts licensed for
“e-use will” be actually embedded by InDesign, therefore if you want to
embed a font make sure you own the license. An
[OpenType](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenType) font is preferrable.

In order to embed fonts just check Include Embeddable
Fonts from the EPUB Export Options (Cmd+E).



![](imgs/9.png)
Include Embeddable Fonts checked in the EPUB Export Options



### [2.9: Export Early, Export Often](#toc-2-9) {#2-9}

You can find the export option from File \>
Export (or Cmd+E). Of course you need to
choose EPUB as the resulting format. A detail explanation of all the
options available can be found at [9.1](#9-1).

### [2.10: How do I open an EPUB file?](#toc-2-10) {#2-10}

There are several softwares and online applications available. Among the
most used there are [Calibre](http://calibre-ebook.com/) and [Adobe
Digital
Editions](http://www.adobe.com/it/products/digital-editions.html).

## [3: Cover and Images](#toc-3) {#3}

### [3.1: Formats and Resolution](#toc-3-1) {#3-1}

As we will see afterwards (see [9.3](#9-3)), from InDesign is it
possible to export images in 3 formats:

-   JPEG
-   GIF
-   PNG

JPEG could be used in any case, except for images with transparent
background (such as logos). In this case PNG is preferable.

150ppi is generally considered to be a good compromise in terms of
resolution and file size. File size is important cause it directly
affects loading time on limited computing capacity such as mobiles and
e-readers.

### [3.2: Colour Over Greyscale](#toc-3-2) {#3-2}

Consider that your book could be seen on a E Ink device as well as on a
tablet, therefore it makes sense to include your images in colours. On
an e-reader they will automatically set as greyscale.

### [3.3: Two Covers?](#toc-3-3) {#3-3}

In InDesign there are 2 choices for including the cover in the EPUB Export Options(Cmd+E):

1.  Include the cover of your book in the InDesign file as the first
    page. Consider that in this way, it will be exported as both as
    cover and first page of the book.
2.  Choose an image from your computer.



![](imgs/10.png)
Cover settings in the EPUB
Export Options



### [3.4: Optimal Cover Size](#toc-3-4) {#3-4}

There is no clear answer, but it is suggested to keep the size less than
1000px in width and height.

[More
info](http://blog.threepress.org/2009/11/20/best-practices-in-epub-cover-images/)

### [3.5: Groups for Complex Layout](#toc-3-5) {#3-5}

Group elements and rasterize if you want to preserve complex text
layouts. Consider that this will be rendered as image, so it’s better to
have a text version of the same content as well.

1.  Select and group elements (Cmd+G);
2.  While selected go to Object \> Object Export
    Options;
3.  Click on EPUB and HTML, then check Custom Rasterization;
4.  Choose PNG if you want a transparent background;
5.  If you want to have it as a fullpage image check Insert Page Break and select Before and After Image;
6.  Add a description of the picture as an Alt
    Text, in this way if the image is not shown people will still
    be able to know what it is about.



![](imgs/11.png)
Group for complex text layout





![](imgs/12.png)
Group for images that are connected





![](imgs/13.png)
Object Export Options, , Custom
Rasterization checked



### [3.6: Images as Part of the Text](#toc-3-6) {#3-6}

Images need to be inserted in the flow of text in order to be shown at
the right place. Otherwise they will be shown after the whole text.
There are 2 ways to insert the images:

1.  Click on the small blue square on the top right and drag it to the
    point the picture belong in the text;
2.  Cut the image and paste it while you’re inside the textbox, do the
    same with the caption.

With the first method there are some known problems: both the picture
and the caption will be included in a bounding box (\). In order to fix this you will need to work
on the HTML and CSS.



![](imgs/14.png)
First method: image linked to the text



### [3.7: Manage the Layout of the Image](#toc-3-7) {#3-7}

Go to Object \> Object Export Options to manage
the layout of the image.

[More
info](http://help.adobe.com/en_US/indesign/cs/using/WSa285fff53dea4f8617383751001ea8cb3f-6f2fa.html#WS8c5bc4f64c7a4a3d-7cbbfcee12dbd4ad69f-8000)

### [3.8: Alt Text for Every Picture](#toc-3-8) {#3-8}

As said in [3.6](#3-6), it’s important to have an Alt Text for every
image included in the document.



![](imgs/15.png)
Alt Text box in Object Export
Options.



## [4: Organizing the File for ePub Export](#toc-4) {#4}

### [4.1: The Articles Panel](#toc-4-1) {#4-1}

Use the Articles Panel (Window \> Articles) to
manage the contents and the order of your publication. Add content to
your articles by drag and drop content into it. When export to ePub
(Cmd+E) set Content
Order as Same as Articles Panel to make
your changes effective.

When you add a text box to an article, the whole text will be rendered
in the ePub even if it’s oversetting in the InDesign document.

[More
info](http://help.adobe.com/en_US/indesign/cs/using/WS8c5bc4f64c7a4a3d78b7a8b312dbccaf5b2-8000.html)



![](imgs/16.png)
Window \> Articles.





![](imgs/17.png)
The Articles Panel.





![](imgs/18.png)
Same as Articles Panel as Content Order in the EPUB Export
Options.



### [4.2: No Tags, Text Repetitions, Etc.](#toc-4-2) {#4-2}

Don’t include in neither in the Articles panel
nor in the flow of text unnecessary elements such as tags or repeated
text.



![](imgs/19.png)
A list of tags, not to be included in the articles.



### [4.3: Split the Document](#toc-4-3) {#4-3}

Splitting the document (in different XHTML files) is important because
having a too big document would mean a quite big load for a device in
order to quickly navigate it, for instance when one wants to check a
footnote and then go back to the text.

In order to split the document, check the Split
Document option in the Export Tagging
options for each paragraph style you want to break the document, such as
the title of the TOC (Table of Contents), or the titles of articles.

Then you will need to select Split Document based on Based on Paragraph Style Export Tags from the Export(Cmd+E) panel.



![](imgs/20.png)
Split Document checked in the Paragraph Style Options





![](imgs/21.png)
Split Document based on Based
on Paragraph Style Export Tags from the Export(Cmd+E) panel.



## [5: General TOC and Inner TOC](#toc-5) {#5}

### [5.1: The General TOC](#toc-5-1) {#5-1}

Any ePub document has a general TOC (Table of Contents) that isn’t
included in the actual pages of the document. Even if you don’t do
anything, it will be automatically created and it will include a single
voice which is the whole document.

### [5.2: Modify the General TOC](#toc-5-2) {#5-2}

In order to create a general TOC for the ePub go to Layout \> Table of Content:

1.  Include the paragraph style that you want to use as title of the TOC
    element;
2.  You can add other styles to create a hierarchic TOC;
3.  Save the style;
4.  When you export the ePub choose the style you created as TOC Style.

[More
Info](http://help.adobe.com/en_US/indesign/cs/using/WS49FB9AF6-38AB-42fb-B056-8DACE18DDF63a.html)



![](imgs/22.png)
TOC based on article-title as Paragraph Style.





![](imgs/23.png)
TOC Style selection in the EPUB
Export Options.



### [5.3: The Inner TOC](#toc-5-3) {#5-3}

Even if it’s not mandatory, it could be useful for readers to have an
inner TOC, it could be different from the general one: other contents
could be added and in a more articulate way.

If there is already one, the TOC prepared for the printed version can be
preserved. In this case it’s needed to add an internal hyperlink for
each voice (see [7.2](#7-2)).

### [5.4: No Page Numbers!](#toc-5-4) {#5-4}

Remember not to include any reference to page numbers in the Inner TOC.
You could for instance not include them in the Articles panel (check [4.1](#4-1)).

## [6: Lists and Tables](6) {#6}

### [6.1: Lists](#toc-6-1) {#6-1}

For each list create a paragraph style from Window \>
Styles \> Paragraph Styles. The options specifically referred to
lists are the one under Bullets and Numberings.

[More
info](http://help.adobe.com/en_US/indesign/cs/using/WSa285fff53dea4f8617383751001ea8cb3f-6da6a.html)



![](imgs/24.png)
Bullets and Numberings panel in the Paragraph Style Options



### [6.2: Tables](#toc-6-2) {#6-2}

For each table create a table style from Window \>
Styles \> Table Styles. If you have a table with a complex layout
is better to rasterize it (see [3.6](#3-6)).

[More
info](http://help.adobe.com/en_US/indesign/cs/using/WSa285fff53dea4f8617383751001ea8cb3f-6ff5a.html)



![](imgs/25.png)



## [7: External and Internal Hyperlinks](#toc-7) {#7}

### [7.1: External Hyperlinks](#toc-7-1) {#7-1}

Add external hyperlinks via Windows \> Interactive \>
Hyperlinks. You can search them looking for “www”, “http”, etc.
You can also attribute a specific Character
Style to links.

The task can be done automatically using the option Convert URLs to Hyperlinks findable clicking on the
right top triangle. Usually this method doesn’t work perfectly because
the ”http://” is not automatically added.



![](imgs/26.png)
Hyperlinks panel



### [7.2: Internal Hyperlinks](#toc-7-2) {#7-2}

Add internal hyperlinks to the inner TOC and to the whole document via
Windows \> Interactive \> Hyperlinks. In oder to
do so you need to select the text you want your link to go to and select
New Hyperlink Destination. Give it a name and
save it.

After that you need to go to the text that links to the previous text
and to Create a New Hyperlink. It should link to
Text Anchor, in particular the one you just
created.



![](imgs/27.png)
Adding a New Hyperlink Destination





![](imgs/28.png)
Linking to Text Anchor



## [8: Cleaning the file and Adding Main Metadata](#toc-8) {#8}

### [8.1: No Unused Styles](#toc-8-1) {#8-1}

Delete all the unused styles. You can look for them via Edit \> Find/Change. There you need to look for a
specific style from Find Format.

[More
info](http://help.adobe.com/en_US/indesign/cs/using/WSFB3603CC-8D84-48d8-9F77-F3E0644CB0B6a.html)



![](imgs/29.png)
Find/Change panel



### [8.2: No Local Overrides](#toc-8-2) {#8-2}

As said before (see [2.1](#2-1)) it’s preferable not to have local
overrides, in order to keep the ePub clean. Find and remove any local
overrides, indicated by the plus sign(+) next to the style. You can use
the [Show Text Overrides
plugin](http://in-tools.com/article/scripts-blog/showing-text-formatting-overrides/)
to highlight them.

### [8.3: No Spaces in Filenames](#toc-8-3) {#8-3}

Make sure that all linked files (and the InDesign file itself) don’t
have spaces nor special characters in their names.

### [8.4: No Useless nor Print-oriented Characters](#toc-8-4) {#8-4}

Make sure there are no double spaces and all the typical formatting
errors. Check misspells and useless characters (this should be already
done for the printed version).

### [8.5: No References to the Printed Edition](#toc-8-5) {#8-5}

Make sure there are no references to the printed edition such as
“printed in…”, etc. Also make sure there are no references to inner
pages (such as “p. 23”), in notes as well. Lastly, make sure that there
are no repetitions of the the title in pages such as frontispiece, etc.

### [8.6: Add links and e-version specific elements to colophon.](#toc-8-6) {#8-6}

You’ll probably mention the publishing house, so add a link to its
website. Remember to use an ISBN specific for the ePub. Remember also to
add the rights for your publication.



![](imgs/30.png)
Creative Commons as the rights in the text of the publication



### [8.7: InDesign Errors and Layout Problems](#toc-8-7) {#8-7}

InDesign automatically detect errors in the document (such as missing
fonts). You can find the alert on the bottom left of the software’s
window. Make sure there are no problems with pictures and with the
layout in general (missing fonts, broken paragraphs, etc).

[More
info](http://help.adobe.com/en_US/indesign/cs/using/WSa285fff53dea4f8617383751001ea8cb3f-7060a.html)



![](imgs/31.png)
The Preflight panel showing there are no errors



### [8.8: Check Both Internal and External Hyperlinks](#toc-8-8) {#8-8}

As above. Make sure that internal links are bidirectional. If you added
them automatically, consider that you’ll probably get external links
where you don’t want them.

### [8.9: Assign HTML Tags](#toc-8-9) {#8-9}

By default InDesign will export each paragraph style as a \ (paragraph in HTML) and characters as \. HTML allows to tag elements in a more
specific way, hierarchically defining headlines for instance (\<h1\>, \<h2\>, etc.).

You can set what tag you want to use and what class from the Export Tagging panel from Paragraph
Style Options. It is also useful to merge style that are similar
under a single class.

Remember to do so for bold (\),
italic (\) and superscript (\).



![](imgs/32.png)
Export Tagging options in Paragraph Style Options



### [8.10: Metadata](#toc-8-10) {#8-10}

Add the basic metadata (data about other data) from File \> File Info, other ones will be implemented
directly in the ePub code (see [10.4.1](#10-4-1)).

-   Title;
-   Author(s);
-   Description;
-   Keywords;
-   Rights.



![](imgs/33.png)
File Info options.



## [9: Export](#toc-9) {#9}

### [9.1: Export Options](#toc-9-1) {#9-1}

You can export from File \> Export (Cmd+E).

[More
info](http://helpx.adobe.com/indesign/using/export-content-epub-cs6.html)

### [9.2: General Panel](#toc-9-2) {#9-2}

1.  Even though the official current version for EPUB is 3.0, the *de
    facto* is 2.0.1 as it’s widely supported.
2.  As said before (see [2.4](#2-4)) there are two possibilities for the
    cover.
3.  Choose the style you created before (see [5.2](#5-2)) as TOC Style.
4.  You can add margins to your page even though most e-readers will
    overwrite this setting.
5.  Choose Same as Articles Panel as Content Order.
6.  The default for footnotes is at the end of the story. If you prefer
    you can add footnotes after paragraph.
7.  Check Remove Forced Line Breaks to remove
    those breaks used for print layout.
8.  Finally you can map bullet and numbers respectively to unordered and
    ordered lists.



![](imgs/34.png)
General options in EPUB Export
Options



### [9.3: Image Panel](#toc-9-3) {#9-3}

1.  Check Preserve Appearance from Layout if you
    want to keep the way images are cropped, etc.
2.  Choose Relative to Page as Image Size if you want a value expressed in
    percentage (e.g. 40% of the page width);
3.  Choose Image Alignment and Spacing;
4.  You can insert a page break before, after or both before and after
    you images;
5.  Choose JPEG as Image Conversion’s format;
6.  Choose the Image Quality and the Format Method for your images;
7.  If you check Ignore Object Export Settings
    the settings for specific images will be overwritten.



![](imgs/35.png)
Image options in EPUB Export
Options



### [9.4: Advanced Panel](#toc-9-4) {#9-4}

1.  You can choose to Include Document Metadata;
2.  Also you can add the Publisher and a Unique ID that could be the ISBN;
3.  Check Include Style Definitions if you want
    InDesign to generate a CSS for you;
4.  You shouldn’t have any local override, so you don’t need to check
    Preserve Local Overrides;
5.  Include Embeddable Fonts only if you need
    them;
6.  You can add Additional CSS, such as the one
    attached to this tutorial, this could be useful if you have a whole
    series with the same style.



![](imgs/36.png)
Advanced options in EPUB Export
Options



### [9.5: Validate your EPUB](#toc-9-5) {#9-5}

In order to validate you EPUB you need EpubCheck. You can use either the
[online
validator](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fvalidator.idpf.org%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGFdp5mf_sMg3HV2Fr2hy9eM2YbcA)
or the [desktop app](https://code.google.com/p/epubcheck/). Correct the
errors if there are.

## [10: Fix HTML and CSS](#toc-10) {#10}

An ePub file is basically a ZIP file containing, beside other structure
files, all the contents in XHTML documents and the style in one or more
CSS files. You can make changes to those files using any Text Editor. Of
course you can use editors with syntax highlight such as
[gedit](http://projects.gnome.org/gedit/) or
[Coda](http://panic.com/coda/).

### [10.1: Access the ePub](#toc-10-1) {#10-1}

In order to access the inner files of your ePub you need to unzip it. To
do so you can use this [ePub unzip
app](http://www.mobileread.com/forums/showpost.php?p=1181614&postcount=18).
From the same link you can download the ePub zip app that you will need
to compact your ePub again after you made your changes.

### [10.2: Cover](#toc-10-2) {#10-2}

Keith Falgren
[suggests](http://blog.threepress.org/2009/11/20/best-practices-in-epub-cover-images/)
the following solution as the best practice for the cover. The following
code should be included in a specific XHTML file.

``` {.code}
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        Cover
        
            body, div, dl, dt, dd, ul, ol, li, h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6, p, pre, code, blockquote {
                margin: 0;
                padding: 0;
                border-width: 0;
            }
            p#cover {
                margin: 0;
                padding: 0;
                text-align: center;
            }
            img#cover-image {
                height: 100%;
                max-width: 100%;
            }
        
    </head>
    <body>
        
            
        
</html>
            
```

### [10.3: CSS and XHTML](#toc-10-3) {#10-3}

#### [10.3.1: Padding or Margin?](#toc-10-3-1) {#10-3-1}

There are two possibilities to space elements vertically:

1.  using margin (margin-bottom: 3em;);
2.  using padding (padding-bottom: 3em;);

Apparently they act the same, but actually padding is suggested because
it works better when near to the bottom of the page.

#### [10.3.2: Delete Defaults](#toc-10-3-2) {#10-3-2}

InDesign will automatically add CSS settings that are not rendered
because they are defaults. Examples are:

-   margin: 0;
-   padding: 0;
-   font-style: normal;

#### [10.3.3: Delete Font Colour if not necessary](#toc-10-3-3) {#10-3-3}

InDesign will automatically add a colour for the text in the CSS. In
several cases this attribute is useless therefore it can be deleted.

#### [10.3.4: Delete Redundant Classes](#toc-10-3-4) {#10-3-4}

Such tags as superscripts or italics (\,
\) automatically get a class from
InDesign:

-   \
-   \

The class can be deleted as long it’s not there to differentiate tags.

#### [10.3.5: Use Page Breaks](#toc-10-3-5) {#10-3-5}

Page breaks are useful to break a page before or after a certain
element. It’s also possible to avoid that automatic page breaks happen
within some elements bound together. The CSS attributes are:

-   page-break-before: always;
-   page-break-after: before;
-   page-break-inside: avoid;

[More info](http://www.w3schools.com/cssref/pr_print_pageba.asp)

#### [10.3.6: Images with Captions](#toc-10-3-6) {#10-3-6}

It’s useful to bind together images with their captions. In order to do
so set the images as follows in the XHTML files.

``` {.code}

    
    Caption
            
```

#### [10.3.7: No “char-style-override” class](#toc-10-3-7) {#10-3-7}

Often InDesign adds a char-style-override
class to certain tags. Make sure the class doesn’t add anything and
delete it both from the XHTML than CSS files.

### [10.4: The OPF file](#toc-10-4) {#10-4}

The OPF file is basically divided in 4 parts:

-   metadata;
-   manifest;
-   spine;
-   guide.

[More info](http://www.idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPF_2.0.1_draft.htm#TOC2.0)

#### [10.4.1: Metadata](#toc-10-4-1) {#10-4-1}

Metadata are data about other data. They are used to provide information
about the publication as a whole.

[More info](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metadata)

##### [10.4.1.1: Namespaces](10-4-1-1) {#10-4-1-1}

InDesign will automatically set the XML namespace to the following:

``` {.code}
<metadata xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/">
            
```

Add the following to have the possibility to add futher info in the
metadata:

``` {.code}
<metadata xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" xmlns:opf="http://www.idpf.org/2007/opf">
            
```

##### [10.4.1.2: Title](10-4-1-2) {#10-4-1-2}

The title should be already included in the following form:

``` {.code}
Unlike Us Reader
            
```

[More
info](http://www.idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPF_2.0.1_draft.htm#Section2.2.1)

##### [10.4.1.3: Authors and Roles](10-4-1-3) {#10-4-1-3}

Author set in InDesign should be already there. More than one authors
could be added and through the opf:role
attribute their role could be specified.

``` {.code}
Geert Lovink
Miriam Rasch
Solon Barocas
Caroline Bassett
[]
            
```

[More
info](http://www.idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPF_2.0.1_draft.htm#Section2.2.2)

##### [10.4.1.4: Publisher](10-4-1-4) {#10-4-1-4}

The publisher should be already included in the following form:

``` {.code}
Institute of Network Cultures
            
```

[More
info](http://www.idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPF_2.0.1_draft.htm#Section2.2.5)

##### [10.4.1.5: Subjects](10-4-1-5) {#10-4-1-5}

Subjects can be added in form of keywords.

``` {.code}
social, media, monopolies, alternatives, internet, web, online, digital, Facebook, twitter, Mark Zuckerberg, unlike us, critique, theory, art, practice, economy, political, philosophy, social sciences, essays, network, privacy, database, web 2.0, individuation, collective, Lorea, Foursquare, design, program, code, graph, business, intervention, resistance, occupy, protest, Diaspora, hackers, hacking, federation, Distribution, centralization, decentralization, architecture
            
```

[More
info](http://www.idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPF_2.0.1_draft.htm#Section2.2.3)

##### [10.4.1.6: Description](10-4-1-6) {#10-4-1-6}

A short description of the content could be added.

``` {.code}
The Unlike Us Reader offers a critical examination of social media, bringing together theoretical essays, personal discussions, and artistic manifestos. How can we understand the social media we use everyday, or consciously choose not to use? We know very well that monopolies control social media, but what are the alternatives? While Facebook continues to increase its user population and combines loose privacy restrictions with control over data, many researchers, programmers, and activists turn towards designing a decentralized future. Through understanding the big networks from within, be it by philosophy or art, new perspectives emerge.
            
```

[More
info](http://www.idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPF_2.0.1_draft.htm#Section2.2.3)

##### [10.4.1.7: Date](10-4-1-7) {#10-4-1-7}

A date relative to the publication could be added in the following form;
month and day are not mandatory.

``` {.code}
2013-02
            
```

[More
info](http://www.idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPF_2.0.1_draft.htm#Section2.2.10)

##### [10.4.1.8: Language](10-4-1-8) {#10-4-1-8}

The language of the publication could be added in the following form:

``` {.code}
en-GB
            
```

##### [10.4.1.9: Rights](10-4-1-9) {#10-4-1-9}

Rights of the publication could be added in the following form:

``` {.code}
This publication is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution, NonCommercial, ShareAlike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0).
            
```

##### [10.4.1.10: Identifier](10-4-1-10) {#10-4-1-10}

At least one unique identifier must be included. This could be the ISBN
number.

``` {.code}
978-90-818575-5-0
            
```

[More
info](http://www.idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPF_2.0.1_draft.htm#Section2.2.10)

##### [10.4.1.11: Other Metadata](10-4-1-11) {#10-4-1-11}

It is possible to add other metadata.

[More info](http://www.idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPF_2.0.1_draft.htm#TOC2.2)

#### [10.4.2: Spine](#toc-10-4-2) {#10-4-2}

The spine defines the linear order of the publication. The linear attribute is useful for items that are part
of the publication but are not actual content (such as cover, colophon,
etc.)

``` {.code}

    
    
    
    []

            
```

[More
info](http://www.idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPF_2.0.1_draft.htm#Section2.4)

#### [10.4.3: Guide (optional)](#toc-10-4-3) {#10-4-3}

The guide element identifies fundamental structural components of the
publication such as cover, list of illustrations, etc.

[More
info](http://www.idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPF_2.0.1_draft.htm#Section2.6)

### [10.5: The General Table of Contents: the NCX file](#toc-10-5) {#10-5}

The NCX file structures the TOC that will be automatically displayed by
the reading software. InDesign doesn’t allow complex structures,
therefore if you need a nested TOC you’ll need to organize it in the
following way.

``` {.code}

        
                Theory of Social Media
            
            
                
                    
                        The Most Precious Good in the Era of Social Technologies
                    
                    
                

            
```

ID’s should not be repeated more than once and the playOrder attribute should be consistent with the
actual order of the XHTML files.



# A Layered Book {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
May 20, 2013 at 6:28 pm.

> I am not advocating the sheer accumulation of data, or arguing for
> links to databanks—so-called hyperlinks. These can amount to little
> more than an elaborate form of footnoting. Instead of bloating the
> electronic book, I think it possible to structure it in layers
> arranged like a pyramid. The top layer could be a concise account of
> the subject, available perhaps in paperback. The next layer could
> contain expanded versions of different aspects of the argument, not
> arranged sequentially as in a narrative, but rather as self-contained
> units that feed into the topmost story. The third layer could be
> composed of documentation, possibly of different kinds, each set off
> by interpretative essays. A fourth layer might be theoretical or
> historiographical, with selections from previous scholarship and
> discussions of them. A fifth layer could be pedagogic, consisting of
> suggestions for classroom discussion and a model syllabus. And a sixth
> layer could contain readers’ reports, exchanges between the author and
> the editor, and letters from readers, who could provide a growing
> corpus of commentary as the book made its way through different groups
> of readers.
>
> A new book of this kind would elicit a new kind of reading. Some
> readers might be satisfied with a study of the upper narrative. Others
> might also want to read vertically, pursuing certain themes deeper and
> deeper into the supporting essays and documentation. Still others
> might navigate in unanticipated directions, seeking connections that
> suit their own interests or reworking the material into constructions
> of their own. In each case, the appropriate texts could be printed and
> bound according to the specifications of the reader. The computer
> screen would be used for sampling and searching, whereas concentrated,
> long-term reading would take place by means of the conventional
> printed book or downloaded text.

Robert Darnton, [“The New Age of the
Book”](http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/1999/mar/18/the-new-age-of-the-book/?pagination=false)
in *The New York Review of Books*, 18 March 1999.



# Testing the Unlike Us Reader ePub Version on Kobo Mini, Sony Reader PRS-T2, Cresta CEB665 {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
May 17, 2013 at 1:46 pm.

![](imgs/all.jpg)



# Preview of the Unlike Us Reader, mobi version {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
May 13, 2013 at 8:04 am.

![](imgs/2013-05-12-17.35.38.jpg)



# Available digital versions of Cory Doctorow’s “With a Little Help” {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
April 28, 2013 at 5:09 pm.

![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2013-04-28-at-7.03.30-PM.png)

As a strategy for dissemination, the novel “With a Little Help” by Cory
Doctorow is provided in 5 different official formats. Some fan-converted
versions are available as well.

<http://craphound.com/walh/e-book/browse-all-versions>



# “EBooks violate the fundamental promise of the Internet” {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
April 25, 2013 at 3:25 pm.

> EBooks violate the fundamental promise of the Internet. Anyone can
> publish a website. Anyone can offer content for free or sell whatever
> they want from a website. Small commissions to payment processors and
> web hosting costs notwithstanding, the Internet empowers a seller to
> engage directly with a buyer. Ebooks break this promise; the writer
> should be able to engage directly with the reader. The writer should
> be able to sell directly to the reader. Imagine if you had to pay your
> web hosting company 30% of your gross every time you sold an item on
> your website—that’s exactly what eBookstores do. […] The fact that
> paper books have traditionally been sold in bookstores does not mean
> that an “online bookstore” is the only legitimate place to sell
> eBooks. In fact, an online bookstore is no different than any other
> e-commerce company that displays and sells the products in its
> database. Downloading and installing book software should be no
> different than downloading and installing any other software. To be
> accurate, publishers can produce and distribute their own ePub eBook
> files but these still rely on dedicated eReader software or hardware.
> But you’re reading this article in a web browser. Why should reading a
> book require a special device, application, or intermediary service?

Dave Bricker, [Why Ebooks Belong in the Web
Browser](http://theworldsgreatestbook.com/ebooks-belong-in-the-browser/?goback=.gde_104765_member_234634475),
April 21 2013



# Ebooks and Ownership {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
April 15, 2013 at 7:41 am.

> In current research for Microsoft, Sellen has learned that many people
> do not feel much ownership of e-books because of their impermanence
> and intangibility: “They think of using an e-book, not owning an
> e-book,” she says.

Ferris Jabr, *The Reading Brain in the Digital Age: The Science of Paper
versus Screens*, [Scientific
American](http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=reading-paper-screens&page=2)



# Publishing Companies Are Technology Companies {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
April 13, 2013 at 11:56 am.

> It’s true that success for any individual experiment is far from
> guaranteed, and the form and marketplace are still evolving. But there
> are rewards for early investments in a nascent medium: ownership of
> repeatable workflows, an understanding of how authors can bridge the
> creative divide, creation of reusable technology, and most importantly
> pioneering the development of a new audience, community, and
> marketplace.

Eli Horowitz and Russell Quinn, [Publishing Companies Are Technology
Companies. Now It’s Time For Them To Act Like
It](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/eli-horowitz/publishing-companies-technology_b_3060524.html?utm_hp_ref=books),
Huffington



# Paper + Digital Access {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
April 6, 2013 at 8:04 am.

> It makes sense to have a third tier of book: paper + digital access. I
> am more than willing to pay a little extra for a book if it means that
> I have a copy for my library shelves and I can read it on a tablet on
> the subway. Amazon in particular is well positioned to implement this
> pricing structure. Better yet, why not a subscription service? \$20/mo
> for all the books I can read? Unfortunately, as of now, the only
> options for paper book fans that want to use ebooks for convenience
> are to pay twice, or maintain two disjoint book libraries. Like its
> content, ebook pricing models cling to the past.

Kane Hsieh, [Why Do We Keep Making Ebooks Like Paper
Books?](http://gizmodo.com/5993800/why-do-we-keep-making-ebooks-like-paper-books)
April 5, 2013



# Opinions and Stats About Digital Publishing as Q&A {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
April 5, 2013 at 2:49 pm.

**Are tablets and e-readers are two competing markets?**[Yes. The
booming market for tablet computers is starting to make the dedicated
e-reader
obsolete.](http://edition.cnn.com/2013/02/28/tech/gaming-gadgets/tablets-replacing-e-readers)
*February 28, 2013*

**How many ebooks does Amazon sell in comparison to printed
ones?**[Amazon now sells more ebooks than hardbacks and paperbacks
combined, the company has
said.](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-19148146) *August 6, 2012*

**What are the most popular ereaders on the US market?**[Amazon’s Kindle
is by far the most popular device, owned by 62% of e-book readers;
Barnes and Noble’s Nook has 22% of the
market.](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/04/05/ereaders-ebooks-survey-how-many-people-read_n_1405449.html)
*June 4, 2012*

**Do ebooks substitute printed ones?**[Not at all. Ebook readers are
still voracious consumers of print books
too.](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/04/05/ereaders-ebooks-survey-how-many-people-read_n_1405449.html)
*June 4, 2012*

**Does the iPad’s retina display measure up to e-ink?**[No. If you love
reading and are looking to invest a chunk of money into a device as a
dedicated e-reader, then the iPad is not your best
bet.](http://arstechnica.com/apple/2012/04/why-the-new-ipads-retina-display-loses-the-battle-in-the-e-reader-wars/)
*April 11, 2012*

**How many US citizens own an e-reader?**[29% of Americans age 18 and
older own at least one specialized device for e-book reading – either a
tablet or an e-book
reader.](http://libraries.pewinternet.org/2012/04/04/the-rise-of-e-reading/)
*April 4, 2012*

**How many American adults have read ebooks?** [A fifth of American
adults have read an e-book in the past
year.](http://libraries.pewinternet.org/2012/04/04/the-rise-of-e-reading/)
*April 4, 2012*

**How does E-book reading happens?**[E-book reading happens across an
array of devices, including smartphones. In our December survey we found
that e-book readers age 16 and older were just as likely to have read an
e-book on their computers as had read e-book reader devices specifically
made for e-book consumption. Cell phones are reading devices,
too.](href=) *April 4, 2012*

**From the perspective of the book’s typology, did the market of ebooks
used to follow the same pattern of physical books in 2011?**[No. While
the majority of physical book sales are in adult non-fiction, the
majority of ebook sales are in adult
fiction.](http://www.sourcebooks.com/blog/ebooks-how-far-how-fast.html)
*2011*

**What were the most common ways to read an ebook in 2010?**[Laptops
only slightly trump the Kindle, 35 percent to 32 percent. Coming in
third was the iPhone, with 15 percent, followed by a Sony e-reader (12
percent), netbooks (10 percent) and the Barnes & Noble Nook (9 percent).
Also at 9 percent was the
iPad.](http://www.wired.com/business/2010/11/and-the-most-popular-way-to-read-an-e-book-is/)
*August 10, 2010*



# Resources: Social Reading, Design Experiments, Blogs on Publishing {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
March 29, 2013 at 10:13 am.



Design & Art:





- <http://volumique.com/v2/>





- <http://www.elektrobiblioteka.net/> more
here: <https://vimeo.com/47656204>





- <http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1371597318/the-peoples-e-book>









Platforms for social reading:





- <http://www.goodreads.com/>





- <http://www.openbookmarks.org/>





- <http://www.shelfari.com/>





- <http://www.librarything.com/>









Blogs:





- <http://www.idealog.com/>





- <http://publishingperspectives.com/>





- <http://www.pigsgourdsandwikis.com/>





- <http://readingforms.com/>





- <http://blogs.lgru.net/ft/>





- <http://hybridpublishing.org/>





# First Look: “Unlike Us Reader” Default Export from InDesign to EPUB 2.0.1 {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Silvio
Lorusso](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/silviolorusso/ "Posts by Silvio Lorusso"),
March 29, 2013 at 3:55 pm.

![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2013-03-29-at-4.32.21-PM.png)

![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2013-03-29-at-4.21.44-PM.png)

“Unlike Us Reader” Default Export from InDesign CS6 to EPUB 2.0.1
format, then viewed in Calibre. File size:
3.1mb.[here](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2014/10/Unlike-Us-reader-default-epub-2.0.13-1.epub).

-   Cover missing
-   TOC missing
-   Problems with headlines in TOC
-   Inner TOC not working (no links)
-   Footnotes work, even though problem with lineheight
-   Books header rendered as well in the EPUB
-   Title and author detached from subtitle
-   Visual problems in rendering the subtitle
-   Block quotes work
-   No separation between end of the article (references) and footnotes
-   Images distributed after the article





![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2013-03-29-at-4.38.33-PM.png)
TOC missing





![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2013-03-29-at-4.35.33-PM.png)
Images distributed after the article





![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2013-03-29-at-4.30.21-PM.png)
Bold missing in inner titles





![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2013-03-29-at-4.27.44-PM.png)
Title and author detached from subtitle





![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2013-03-29-at-4.24.22-PM.png)
Invisible voices in the inner TOC





![](imgs/Screen-Shot-2013-03-29-at-4.22.05-PM.png)
Title alignment inherited by the visual layout





# Kick-off Digital Publishing Toolkit {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [kimberley](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/kimberley/ "Posts by kimberley"),
March 24, 2013 at 7:59 am.

*Report: Kick-off Toolkit Digital Publishing 7th of March 2013*

The kick-off meeting on the 7th of March was the official start of the
“Toolkit Digital Publishing” research project. Margreet Riphagen,
projectmanager of the Institute of Network Cultures, gave a short
introduction of the research project and introduced the partners of the
consortium that are involved in the research project. Geert Lovink
(lector Instituut voor Netwerkcultuur) and Florian Cramer (lector
creating010, lectoraat of the Willem de Kooning Academy) introduced
several topics that are important to keep in mind in relation to digital
publishing, and the partners gave short presentations about their know
how and expectations of digital publishing. At the end of the morning we
formed subgroups. Each subgroup, consisting of a publisher, designer and
developer will each formulate their own research projects within the
bigger framework of the Toolkit Digital Publishing research program and
will be based on one or more publications of the publisher.

As Margreet explained the research project is funded by RAAK-MKB
(Regionale Actie en Aandacht voor Kennisinnovatie), which is managed by

[SIA](http://www.innovatie-alliantie.nl/english.html) (Stichting
Innovatie Alliantie).
[Raak–MKB](http://www.innovatie-alliantie.nl/stimuleringsregeling/regeling/item/54-raak-mkb.html)
aims to improve knowledge exchange to strengthen the innovative ability
of MKB’s and Universities of Applied sciences.

The overall goal of the project is: “To realise a platform with tools
and methods that are based on open source- standards and tools, with
which publishers in art- and the cultural sector can publish
e-publications that are suitable for several (mobile) devices”

A consortium of partners will collaborate to reach this goal. It
consists of a group of publishers –
[BISPublishers](http://www.bispublishers.nl), [nai010
publishers](http://www.naipublishers.nl/nai010publishers/nai010_nl.html),
[FrameWeb](http://www.frameweb.com/magazines), [Institute of Network
Cultures](http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/portal/), and
[Valiz](http://www.valiz.nl) – a group of developers and programmers –
[Arjen de Jong](http://www.arjendejong.nl) (Essence),
[Medamo](http://www.medamo.nl), [Brinka](http://www.brinka.nl),
[PUNTPIXEL](http://www.puntpixel.nl), [Restruct
Web](http://restruct.nl), and [Silvio
Lorusso](http://www.silviolorusso.com) – an expertise group that
consists of [Museum of the Image](http://www.motimuseum.nl), and
[Constant – Open Source Publishers](http://osp.constantvzw.org), and
other partners involved are: [Creating010](http://creating010.hr.nl) and
[Kircz Research Amsterdam](http://www.kra.nl/Website/benik.htm).

 

**Geert Lovink: about the proliferation and standards in the field of
e-publishing**

Geert emphasized that the project will be focused on experimenting, and
exploring what the possibilities are for design and the distributing
platforms. This particular research project thus doesn’t look into
business models of these digital modes of publishing. As he explains
there are other lectoraten that research this particular question. The
Institute of Network Cultures also looked into these kind of questions
in other projects such as: The New Media of Exchange: Dialogues on
Internet, Monetization and Finance.

He elaborates on the experience INC had with publishing their own
publications on digital platforms such as

[Issuu](http://issuu.com) and [Scribd](http://www.scribd.com), which are
free web readers, and [LuLu](http://www.lulu.com), a paid Print on
Demand service. As becomes clear these are just a small portion off the
platforms for publishing online. Geert also refers to the ePub platform
and the necessity to make all the INC publications available for this
platform. Another important development will be the availability of
Amazon.nl in the Netherlands, that will be probably launched around the
summer of 2013. Geert emphasizes that this development will be a ‘game
changer’ for publishing in the Netherlands if we look at experiences in
other countries. Another platform he refers to is the open source/ free
software platform Ubuntu which is an important international player. The
platform is developed for both Smartphones and Tablets. Another platform
that we should keep an eye out for is the collaboration between Nokia
and Windows. It is still unclear what will happen here, but this will
probably become more clear at the end of the year.

**Florian Cramer: about design and typography in the field of
e-publishing**

Florian starts his introduction with ‘expectation management’. He
explains that the field of design and typography with regards to digital
publishing is like the Internet was in the 1990s. The possibilities seem
endless, but once confronted with the limitations of the platform(s) you
end up with a very poor design. There are several aspects a designer
should keep in mind when designing for e-publishing. For instance the
multitude of devices that each have their own settings and requirements.
In this sense you can see it as the revival of the browser wars of the
90s, where each browser needed its own design. A result of this
splintering of devices is the necessity of reflowable content. The
content needs to be readable on all the different devices, and thus has
to change according to the proportions of the screen. The design is
adjusted dynamically. As Florian explains the paradigm of the page is
disappearing. Another aspect that makes it difficult for designers is
that the reader software itself isn’t fully developed. Most of them for
instance do not support non-European alphabets. Especially for the art-
design publications this will lead to even more limitations.

Florian also discussed several examples of platforms for e-publishing
that are already developed: [The people’s
E-book](http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1371597318/the-peoples-e-book)
– a webapplication for designers and artists to experiment with creating
their own publications. [Kyur8](http://kyur8.com) – this platform is
developed by graphic designers in New York and it allows people to
create their own photobooks on the basis off several templates. It is
based on HTML5. You can see this as a platform for Zines.

According to Florian it is important to collect these best practices and
see what is already done in the field of e-publishing and look for
solutions for the problems we encounter. It is about empowering the
publishers, designers and developers to ensure that they can find their
way in the field of e-publishing on their own.

\*\*\*\* \*\*\*\*

**Expectations and inventory of existing knowledge and best practices
off the partners**

The presentations off the publishers illustrated that there are a lot of
ideas about e-publishing, but not enough know-how and as a result the
steps, or successes, that are made in this direction are very small. As
Rudolf explained “veel vallen en weinig opstaan”. There is a lot of
uncertainty about how to approach e-publishing, and knowledge about the
possibilities that are already out there is missing, especially in
relation to distribution.

From the perspective of the developers and designers the remarks made by
Florian are confirmed. Annemieke from Restruct Web explains how their
first experience with e-publishing was very challenging as they had
relatively high expectations of the possibilities. They developed an App
for Cross-lab at the WdKA Rotterdam. They encountered problems with
integrating video into the app. Since it had to be readable without an
internet connection the video needed to be integrated in the file
itself, and eventually they ended up with a large application file that
only works on a Apple tablet version. As she emphasized with regard to
e-publishing it is important to develop something that is sustainable:
It needs to work on several platforms and endure the test of time and
platform updates.

The designers also addressed the social and interactive possibilities of
e-publishing – how is it possible to share reading experiences, notes
etc. And to what extend is it possible to integrate video, images or
even Google maps into the e-publication? These questions relate to what
Florian called ‘the Expanded Book”. But, as Florian emphasizes it is
more important to approach e-publshing as a whole new medium. We should
not just try to think about how to translate a book to a digital medium,
but think about the possibilities of publishing beyond adding video and
other interactivity. What new modes of publishing does it ask for?

In response to the question, if it is possible to export e-Pub from
inDesign, Florian refers to the Guru of e-Pub design, Elizabeth Castro,
who wrote the book

[e-Pub straight to the point](http://www.elizabethcastro.com/epub/). It
explains how you can export a document from InDesign to e-Pub. However,
she emphasizes that this process is not without difficulties and is not
the best way to approach designing for e-Pub. \*\*\*\* \*\*\*\*

**Subgroups**

After discussing the experiences and expectation with regards to
e-publishing different subgroups were formed. They each discussed their
first ideas, possibilities and expectations for experimenting with
e-publishing and their specific research project. An important starting
point is to decide on what publication to work with and what platform(s)
to use.

 

The groups formed are:

Group nai010 uitgevers – nai01 uitgevers, medamo, Restruct web and
PUNTPIXEL.

Group Valiz – Valiz and PUNTPIXEL

Group BISPublishers & Frame – Essense and Saulie Warmenhoven

Group Institute of Networkculture – Institute of Network Cultures,
Brinka and a developer still to be confirmed.

  In a following meeting the subgroups will finalize their research
plans and will start experimenting with digital publishing. The eventual
goal of these separate research projects is off course to gather the
experiences and “To realise a platform with tools and methods that are
based on open source- standards and tools, with which publishers in art-
and the cultural sector can publish e-publications that are suitable for
several (mobile) devices”



# Publishing platforms {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Arjen de
Jong](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/arjen-2/ "Posts by Arjen de Jong"),
March 19, 2013 at 2:04 pm.

**Issuu**[www.issuu.com](http://www.issuu.com)

**lulu.com**[www.lulu.com](http://www.lulu.com)

**kyur8**![:)](imgs/icon_smile.gif)<http://kyur8.tumblr.com/>



# on the business of literature {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [sauli](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/sauli-2/ "Posts by sauli"),
March 19, 2013 at 3:27 pm.

<http://www.vqronline.org/articles/2013/spring/nash-business-literature/>

>  “Abundance breaks more things than scarcity.”



# ePub tools {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [sauli](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/sauli-2/ "Posts by sauli"),
March 19, 2013 at 2:05 pm.

**IBooks Author (aka IBA)**

[Apple iBooks Author](http://support.apple.com/kb/PH2742) & [FAQ. van
Apple over iBooks](http://support.apple.com/kb/HT4059)

publiceert naar een proprietary format van apple, lees ook [dit
artikel](http://www.glazman.org/weblog/dotclear/index.php?post/2012/01/20/iBooks-Author-a-nice-tool-but)

 

**Sigil**

[Sigi](https://code.google.com/p/sigil/)l

Open source epub authoring software – geen support voor epub3

 

**Calibre**

[Calibre](http://calibre-ebook.com//)

multi-platform
epub authoring software – geen support voor epub3(?)

### the peoples ebook

-   [the peoples ebook](http://thepeoplesebook.net/)
-   [the peoples ebook op
    kickstarter](http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1371597318/the-peoples-e-book)

Kickstarter project met vergelijkbare outline als Toolkit Online
Publiceren

### baker framework

[http://bakerframework.com](http://bakerframework.com/)

Opensource toolkit voor html5 ebook creation, mac only, publiceert naar
iOS, als standalone app

### mag+

[Plugin voor Indesign](http://magplus.com/) om interactieve magazine
layouts te maken, betaald. Exports naar Android, IOs en Kindle Fire
platforms

### epubcheck

[java programma](https://code.google.com/p/epubcheck/) om epubs te
controleren op fouten



# Bedrijven & digitale publicaties {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [Arjen de
Jong](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/arjen-2/ "Posts by Arjen de Jong"),
March 19, 2013 at 3:32 pm.

**Tabula Nova**

Arco van den Berg, tablet publisher, spreker op
http://ereadingevent.nl/seminar/\#seminar77, Apps en ePub

<http://www.tabulanova.com/>

 

**Yudu**

Engels bedrijf, Multi platform publishing, wel vnl met ‘Gesloten
systemen'(o.a. mbv Adobe AIR, Apple’s IBA).

<http://www.yudu.com/>

 

**Pressmatrix**

[www.pressmatrix.de](http://www.pressmatrix.de)

Berlin based: “Met onze software bieden we de mogelijkheid tijdschriften
en andere publicaties op mobiele apparaten te publiceren en daarbij ook
interactief te verrijken (o.a. met video, slideshow, textreader en
360°imaging)”



# About ePub {.entry-title .single-title itemprop="headline"}

By [sauli](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/author/sauli-2/ "Posts by sauli"),
March 19, 2013 at 12:10 pm.

-   [EPUB3 standaard](http://idpf.org/epub/30) – de technische
    standaarddocumenten voor de nieuwste versie van epub van het
    International digital publishing forum
-   [wikipedia over EPUB](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EPUB)
-   [wikipedia over iBooks](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBooks)
-   [overzicht van penguin over ebooks en fileformats /
    DRM](http://www.us.penguingroup.com/static/pages/ebooks/ebooks-formats.html)
-   [IBM developerworks artikel over EPUB
    3](http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/xml/library/x-richlayoutepub/index.html?ca=drs-)

# Bloggers' Biographies


## Arie Altena {class="ariealtena"}
Arie Altena is a Dutch is literary scholar, writer and lecturer. 
He writes about art, culture, the Internet, and literature for various magazines and publications including Metropolis M.  He also works as an editor / researcher for [V2, Institute for the Unstable Media](http://v2.nl/), and he is part of the team that organizes the [Sonic Acts Festival](http://www.sonicacts.com/).

## Marc de Bruijn {class="Marc de Bruijn"}
Web developer and graphic designer with a strong focus on the structural side of the design, as well as the technology behind it. We, being PUNTPIXEL, like to build systems, not decorative templates on top of them. This means we're often - if not always - responsible for the whole design process - including the conceptual phase, visual design and actual technical implementation of the design.

## Andre Castro {class="Andre Castro"}
André Castro is a media artist, with a background in sound art and experimental music. His recent practice explores stragies for digital and hybrid publication and offline digital libraries ([bibliotecha.info](http://bibliotecha.info/)). Recenly he began teaching in the Master’s programme of Media Design and Communication at the Piet Zwart Institute, and in Willem de Kooning Academy's Publication Station, both in Rotterdam. [pinknoi.so](http://pinknoi.so/)

## Vicentiu Dinga {class="vince"}
Blogger during the conference *Off the Press*, 22 & 23 May, 2014

## Jakub Dutka {class="jakubdutka"}
Blogger for the conference *Off the Press*, 22 & 23 May, 2014.

## Irina Enache {class="irina"}
Blogger for the conference *Off the Press*, 22 & 23 May, 2014.

## Arjen de Jong {class="Arjen de Jong"}
Arjen de Jong is senior designer at [Essense](http://essense.eu/), an Amsterdam based service design agency. He was a founding member of Buro Duplex, a collective of freelance programmers and designers. He also ini- tiated the Stereo Publication project, a cross-media publishing project avant la lettre.

## Timo Klok {class="timoklok"}
Media-allrounder, problem solver and frontend developer at VPRO. 

## Harold Konickx {class="haroldkonickx"}
<!-- missing -->

## Silvio Lorusso {class="Silvio Lorusso"} 
Silvio Lorusso is an Italian artist and designer. His ongoing PhD research in Design Sciences at IUAV University of Venice is focused on the intersections between publishing and digital technology from the perspective of art and design. He regularly collaborates with the [Institute of Network Cultures](http://networkcultures.org/) in Amsterdam. After he received his MA in Visual and Multimedia Communications in 2011, he spent a period of study at the Networked Media course of the Piet Zwart Institute in Rotterdam. He took part in exhibitions, festival and events such as Transmediale (Germany), Unlike Us (Netherlands), and Fahrenheit39 (Italy). He has written for blogs and magazines such as Progetto Grafico and Doppiozero. He launched the Post-Digital Publishing Archive ([p-dpa.net](http://p-dpa.net/)) in 2013.


## Michael Murtaugh {class="Michael Murtaugh"}
Michael Murtaugh ([automatist.org](http://automatist.org/)) designs and researches community databases, interactive documentaries, and tools for new forms of reading and writing online. He teaches in the Master’s Degree programme in Media Design and Communication at the Piet Zwart Institute in Rotterdam, and is a member of Constant in Brussels.

## Miriam Rasch {class="Miriam Rasch"}
Miriam Rasch started working as a publication manager at the [Institute of Network Cultures](http://networkcultures.org/) in June 2012. She holds Master’s degrees in Literary Studies (2002) and Philosophy (2005). Since graduating she worked as a (web) editor and from 2008 on as a programmer for the Studium Generale public lectures department at Utrecht University, organizing events and taking care of digital broadcasts and online representation. She also worked as a lecturer for Liberal Arts and Sciences, and is teaching philosophy and media theory in the Media, Information and Communica- tion department. She writes book reviews and guest posts for different websites and magazines; her personal blog can be found on miriamrasch.nl.

## Margreet Riphagen {class="margreet riphagen"}
Margreet Riphagen started working at the [Institute of Network Cultures](http://networkcultures.org/) (INC) in March 2008 and is involved in various research projects. She holds a Master’s degree in Information Science (Human Centered Multimedia), a post-Bachelor’s degree in Business Science, and a Bachelor’s degree in Communication Management. Margreet is the Project Leader of the Digital Publishing Toolkit. Currently Margreet is the coordinator of the PublishingLab, which focuses at the intersection of publishing en digital technologies, both print and digital (hybrid publishing).

## Kimmy Spreeuwenberg {class="kimberley"}
Kimmy Spreeuwenberg is a new media researcher and graphic designer with a special interest in the areas where these two disciplines intersect. She is currently project coordinator of the Digital Publishing Toolkit research project initiated by the [Institute of Network Cultures](http://networkcultures.org/), with whom she collaborates regularly, and teaches at the Willem de Kooning Academy in Rotterdam.

## Marc Stumpel {class="marcstumpel"}
Blogger for the conference *Valt Er Nog Iets Te Ontwerpen*, 28 November, 2013.


## Katía Truijen {class="Katía Truijen"}
Blogger for the conference *Valt Er Nog Iets Te Ontwerpen*, 28 November, 2013.


## Patricia de Vries {class="patricia"}
Blogger for the conference *Off the Press*, 22 & 23 May, 2014.


## Sauli Warmenhoven {class="sauli"}
Sauli Warmenhoven graduated from the Willem de Kooning academy with a degree in Interactive Multimedia in 2005, and he continued his studies and graduated from the Piet Zwart Institute with a masters degree in Media Design. Since then he has been working on a variety of projects, but nowadays he specialises in building a variety of websites, web-apps, and electronic publications for a many a client. The intricacies of HTML, CSS, Javascript and PHP hold no secrets for him, and he uses his extensive knowledge to build smooth-as-butter user experiences and stunning designs.

